What's the two-minute rule? Take
whatever habit you're trying to focus on
and scale it down to something that
takes 2 minutes or less to do. You know,
I have this reader. He started going to
the gym and he lost over 100 lbs. It's
kept off for more than a decade now.
[music] But when he first started to go,
he had a rule where he wasn't allowed to
stay at the gym for longer than 5
minutes, right? It sounds like kind of
ridiculous. Like, oh, clearly this is
not going to get the guy the results he
wants. What you realize is he was
mastering the art of showing up. A habit
must be established before it can be
improved. You need to standardize before
you optimize.
>> And then once we've identified a habit
that we want to replace or eliminate,
what is the mechanism by which we can do
that?
>> Broadly speaking, I think there are four
things that you should do if you want to
build a habit. And I think one of the
best things you can do early on, this is
if I could actually add one thing to
atomic habits that wasn't in it, it
would probably be this.
What is the role that identity plays in
terms of habit formation?
>> Ultimately, I feel like identity may be
the most important thing with habits.
Um,
your habits are how you embody a
particular identity. So, when you make
your bed, you embody the identity of
someone who is clean and organized. If
you study biology for 20 minutes on
Tuesday night, you embody the identity
of someone who is studious. The act of
doing it is proof that you are that type
of person. And eventually you start to
build up this body of evidence for being
that way. You have every reason in the
world to believe it. So one of the core
lessons of atomic habits is that every
action you take is like a vote for the
type of person you wish to become. So,
when you show up at the gym today, you
are casting a vote for being the type of
person who doesn't miss workouts. When
you sit down and make one sales call,
you are casting a vote for being a
salesperson. When you write one
sentence, you are casting a vote for
being a writer. And no, doing one
push-up does not transform your body,
but it does cast a vote for that
identity. It does provide evidence for
being that type of person. And
eventually, as you build up that body of
evidence, you start to take pride in
being that way. And I think that's where
you get to this really resilient place
in terms of building your habits. When
you start to take pride in being that
type of person, you will fight to
maintain the habit. You know, it becomes
the opposite situation. Now, instead of
trying to force yourself to do it,
you're trying to maintain it uh because
it's a part of your identity that you
believe in and that you, you know, want
to to keep. You know, if you take pride
in the size of your biceps, you never
skip arm day at the gym. Now, if you
take pride in how your hair looks, you
have this long hair care routine, you do
it every day. we wouldn't know but
[laughter] you know it's like um and so
um
really the goal is not to read a book
the goal is to become a reader you know
the goal is not to run a marathon it's
to become a runner the goal is not to do
some silent meditation retreat it's to
become a meditator it's to install and
adopt this identity that this is the
type of person that I am and I think
ultimately that's why small habits
matter so much you know behavior and
belief is like two-way street. You know,
what you believe will influence the
actions that you take, but the actions
that you take can also influence what
you believe about yourself. And you
know, every time you show up and do it
in some small way, you prove to yourself
a little bit, hey, maybe I am that kind
of person. And so, my encouragement, my
suggestion is to let the behavior lead
the way. To start with some small action
and then prove to yourself in your in
that moment that you were that kind of
person. And as you start to foster and
build that identity, um, sticking with
the habit becomes easier.
>> I I like the idea of the small, you had
1% better in your book, too. Y,
>> uh, these small changes leading to big
results. I think where people go astray
>> is the lack of patience sort of changes
the outcome. So, I know I want to be
healthier, but I know it's a lot of work
and a lot of time. If I eat healthier, I
go to the gym more. I I just live a
healthier lifestyle. And that's where we
get in trouble, but we do it with
everything. It's not just
>> lack of patience changes the outcome.
That's a good phrase. Um it's definitely
true. I think there are two ways people
can go astray. So there's there's what
you just mentioned, which is not being
patient enough and sticking with it.
We'll talk about that in a minute. The
other one is um small changes can really
matter, but only if they're oriented in
the right way. You know, we we know we
all know people who spend time on
minutia and trivial things. You know,
you kind of waste time on small stuff
that doesn't really matter. And I think
one of the distinctions is are your
small actions accumulating or are they
evaporating? You know, are you doing
small things each day that are oriented
toward a larger outcome or are you doing
small things each day that are just kind
of like one-offs and don't really add
up? In a lot of ways, I feel like the
two time frames that matter most in life
are 10 years and 1 hour, you know? So,
like 10 years is just shorthand for the
big meaningful things that you want to
do in life. Where do you want to be in a
decade? You know, I sometimes I like to
encourage people to don't let a day pass
without doing something that will
benefit you in a decade. Um, and one
hour is how can I do something today
right now that is oriented toward where
I want to be in 10 years. And if you can
kind of live in that simultaneously in
those two modes of thought, if you can
both be thinking long term but acting
short term, then you start looking for
little changes, little adjustments that
do add up, that do accumulate, that are
not trivial and, you know, um,
meaningless. So, um, I think that's one
way people go astray is their their
small actions are not oriented toward
the larger outcome. They're not
accumulating. The second way that they
go astray is what you just mentioned,
which is um lack of patience changes the
outcome. I one of the examples I give in
atomic habits is thinking about an ice
cube, you know. So you walk into a room,
it's cold, you can see your breath, and
the ice cube sitting on the table, you
start heating the room up one degree,
another degree, another degree, ice
cube's still there, and eventually you
get to this tipping point, this phase
transition. The ice cube starts to melt.
It's this like onederee shift, no
different than the shifts that had come
before, but you hit this transition and
things change.
>> And habits are like that a lot of the
time. You know, you'll hear people say
things like, you know, I've been running
for a month. I can't see a change in my
body. Or, we've been meeting every
Friday for 6 months and we still haven't
shipped this feature yet. And it's like,
yeah, that work is not being wasted.
It's just being stored. You know, it's
kind of like complaining about heating
an ice cube up a little bit and it not
melting yet. It's like, well, you just
haven't hit the phase transition. So,
but that's where people give up.
>> Yes. Yes. I The San Antonio Spurs have
uh a quote hanging in their locker room
where it says, you know, they've won
five NBA championships.
And it says, "When I think about giving
up, I think about the stone cutter who
takes his hammer and bangs on the rock a
hundred times without it splitting in
two. And at the 101st blow, it cracks.
And I know that it wasn't the 101st that
did it, but all the hundred that came
before." And so many in things in life
are like that. You know, it's not the
last workout that got you fit. It's all
the hundred that came before. It's not
the last sentence that finishes the
novel. It's all the hundred that came
before. It's not the last conversation
that closes the sale. It's all the
hundred that came before. It's this
willingness to keep showing up and
hammering on the rock and knowing that
at some point you are going to hit that
phase transition. You are going to hit
that, you know, that new um level, but
you need enough persistence to keep
doing it.
>> Are there tips or tricks you have?
Because like when I'm working out, I'm
getting better, but I'm getting better
internally. I just don't I can't visual.
It's not visible,
>> but it is in like I can't see it, but
it's happening. Yes. Are there tips or
tricks you have that we can
>> uh use either psychologically or
practically speaking?
>> This is one of the big lessons for
habits, which is just because
improvements aren't noticeable. Doesn't
mean improvement isn't happening. You
know, you're not going to see a change
on the scale every time you work out.
You're not going to see a change in the
number of subscribers every time you
publish an episode or whatever. Like,
it's, you know, it takes a while. Um,
but the tricky part is if something's
not working, it also takes a while. You
know, you just keep banging your head
against the wall. So, how do you know
when you need to be patient and how do
you know when you need to try something
different? And um sometimes you'll hear
people say like try try again. I
actually think it should be rephrased to
try try differently. You need to keep
trying, but you need to keep trying
different lines of attack. This is I
think Naval has something where he says
you know it's not 10,000 attempts it's
10,000 iterations. You know an iteration
is a different way of doing it. So you
need you need some adjustment to the
approach.
>> And um I don't think you need to do it
10,000 times. Usually just doing it five
different ways or 10 different ways is
enough to see oh one of these is working
better than the other. So this is the
this is the second kind of insight which
is when something goes well usually it
goes pretty well from the beginning.
It's not. Now, that does not what that
does not mean is that you'll always have
the results you want right away or that
you will immediately get the outcome
that you're you're hoping for. But what
it does mean is that you should this was
one of the best pieces of advice given
to me early in my entrepreneurial
career. Somebody told me you should try
things until something comes easily.
>> Now, that doesn't mean that it will be
easy, but it does mean that it results
will come easier than the other things
that you have been trying. And so in a
lot of ways I think what you kind of one
of the big quests for life is to
experiment enough to find what comes
easy for you
>> and then work really hard on what comes
easy because if you work hard on the
thing that you have some skill set for
some strength for some natural aptitude
for then you're very hard to compete
with. So it's just your classic explore
exploit trade-off. you know, early in
the process, you need to explore more
and experiment more. And then eventually
you start to discover, okay, of the 10
things I've tried, these are the two
that work best. Now you need to double
down on what's working and start
exploiting some of the things that um
that are actually getting you results.
>> Peter Thiel gave a talk a while ago and
one of the things he said that really
stood out to me was we underestimate
when something's working, we
underestimate how long it can go for and
how powerful it can be. So often we
change habits that are working for us
too where we change we tinker with
things that are working.
>> Man, there's so many places in life
where this is true. Like I so um
two examples, one in the gym. I have a
friend who was very strong, really good
lifter, um squatted over 500 lb and we
were training together and he was doing
this squat program and it went great. He
made a lot of progress over like this
three-month span and then I had to
travel or something. I didn't see him
for a little while, whatever. I I came
back maybe I saw him like 6 months later
and I said oh hey are you still doing
that squat program? He's like no. I was
like oh did it like did you stall out or
something? He was like no I just got
bored. Um and you're like man it
[laughter] like all the time you know it
happens everywhere. People just um the
quest the desire for novelty um
overpowers the you know the desire to
get results. It's like we just can't
keep sticking with it. So, um, doubling
down on what's working. In a lot of
ways, I feel like the process is
actually quite simple. Try a number of
things, right? So, experiment with a
number of things. Run a number of small
experiments. Once you find something
that works, double down on it and then
keep doing it until it stops working,
which is the step that a lot of people
skip. Um, and then once it stops
working, go back to the start and try a
lot of small experiments again. And it's
really it's really not more it doesn't
need to be more complicated than that.
But people shortcut each step. They
either don't try enough experiments.
They try one or two things and they say,
"Well, this didn't work for me." You're
like, "Well, it's not enough to try two.
Like maybe you need to try 20, you
know." Um and then once they find
something that's working, they maybe
they don't double down on it enough.
That seems once you've tried a lot of
things, you're kind of diversified.
Doubling down feels kind of risky, you
know, to just go all in on something.
But you need to be able to flip that
switch and fully commit. And then once
you're fully committed, people get bored
and so they don't stick with it until it
stops working. Keep doing it if it
doesn't work. This is part of the reason
why I have not published another book
yet. Um, Atomic Habits is working really
well. And so I'm trying to take my own
advice and don't stop until it stops
working. Um, and so
>> dude, that might be forever. [laughter]
>> Yeah. Eventually, eventually you realize
that it's not just about results, right?
It's also about how do you want to live
your life? What do you want to spend
your time on? Um but uh but yeah, so I
think those those three steps probably
should be taken more seriously than they
are.
>> How do we create an environment that
makes behavior change inevitable?
>> I think that's one of the best
questions. How can I create the
conditions for success? You know, how
can I how can I design an environment
where my desired change is easy? In a
lot of ways, that's one of the driving
questions of atomic habits is to say
there's this I came across this body of
research when I was working on the book
about willpower and self-control.
And a lot of the surface level
conversations about habits that people
have are about discipline and willpower.
You know, people will look at a
professional athlete and they'll say,
"Man, if I was just as disciplined as
them, but I, you know, I talked to one
guy who played for the Philadelphia
Eagles and um he said, you know, during
my career,
everything was designed for us. You
know, we went, we would go to the
stadium and we have professional
trainers and nutritionists. The food is
prepared for us. the you know all the
workouts are designed coaches are on us
every day to do the right drills in the
right order and to you know like
everything is there's this environment
where the conditions for success have
been fully created and he's like after I
retired that was the hardest time for me
to stick to it like people would look at
me as a professional athlete and think
wow how disciplined are you but in fact
you know what I was is I was benefiting
from my environment and all of us are
like that and so I I think you can look
around your own environment and say how
can I do a better job of creating the
conditions for success. Let's forget
about me being a more disciplined f
person or being, you know, someone with
superhuman willpower and let's try to
make it as easy as possible for me to do
the things I want to do each day. So, a
couple questions I think are helpful.
One is walk into the rooms where you
spend most of your time each day, your
office, your living room, your kitchen,
bedroom, and just look around and ask
yourself, what is this space designed to
encourage? You know, what behaviors are
obvious here? what behaviors are easy
here? And you'll start to notice that
it's designed for certain things. Um,
you know, a lot of people feel like they
watch too much TV, but walk into any
living room, you know, like where do all
the couches and chairs face? What is
this room designed to get you to do? And
I'm not saying you need to rearrange
your entire house, but you know, you can
notice that if you put the healthy food
out on the counter and it's visible,
you're much more likely to eat it. Like
I one of the examples in the book is
that I used to buy apples and I would
put them in the crisper in the bottom of
the fridge and I would kind of like
forget that they were there. They were
just tucked away in the drawer and then
I'd find them in like a week and like
two of them had gone bad and I'm like
I'm wasting food and I'm wasting money.
So instead I just bought this little
display bowl and I put them in the
counter uh on the counter just visible
and now you grab one whenever you walk
in and they're like gone in two days.
And so it's just a change in the
environment. What is obvious? You know,
are you creating conditions where the
change that you want or the behavior
that you want is obvious, attractive,
easy, and satisfying? And the more that
you can do that, the more likely it is
that you'll follow through. You want to
you want to be able to walk into the
rooms that you're in each day, and the
good habit is the path of least
resistance. It's the easiest thing to
do. And a lot of the time you walk into
rooms and it's the distractions that are
easier to do and you feel like you're
swimming upstream and trying to fight
your environment to make a change
happen. So that was one question. What's
the other one you had around
environment?
>> I like
am I creating the conditions required
for success? What is this room designed
to encourage? Um and then how can I make
this behavior more obvious?
>> And there are there are a number of ways
that you can do that. Like some of it is
just, you know, uh if you want to go for
a run, take your running shoes and your
clothes, set them out the night before.
I have I have one guy who um he sleeps
in his running shorts, so he just gets
up, all he has to do is put his shoes
and a shirt on, then he's out the door.
You know, he's just trying to make it as
frictionless as possible. I found that
uh to give you like another example, if
I buy a six-ack of beer and I put it on
the, you know, shelf where I can just
see it as soon as I open up the door,
I'll grab one each night and have one at
dinner just cuz it's there. But if I
tuck it down on the lowest shelf and
like put it in the back, I gotta like
bend down to see it. Sometimes I'll
forget that it's there. It'll be there
for like two weeks, you know, and it's
just about what is obvious. Um what is
in front of you,
>> just like the apples.
>> Yes. Right. And yeah, it's just the
inverse of that. Um and so, uh I'm not
saying that that's enough to change like
an addicted behavior or anything like
that, but so many of your behaviors will
curtail themselves possibly to the
desired degree if it is less obvious. if
it's not as accessible. Another little
rule that I follow is I take my phone
and I try to leave it uh in another room
until lunch each day. So that just gives
me from like 9 to noonish where I can
work on my own agenda and not respond to
everybody else's agenda. You know, I'm
not interrupted. And if if I have my
phone next to me, I'm like everybody
else. I'll check it every 3 minutes just
cuz it's there, right? But I have a home
office and so I put it in a different
room. It's just down the hall. It's only
like 30 seconds away, but I never go get
it. And so many behaviors are like that.
It's like, well, did you want it or not?
You know, like in the one sense, you
wanted it so bad that you would check it
every 3 minutes when it was next to you,
but in another sense, you never wanted
it bad enough that you would work for 30
seconds and walk down the hall to get
it. And so, a little bit of friction can
sometimes go a long way in shaping a
behavior.
>> What would you say to somebody who
doesn't have the confidence to start?
Anytime you do something new, by
definition, you are doing something
you're unqualified for. It can't it
can't be if you've already done it. If
you already have some type of
qualification or skill set or
experience, then you're qualified for
it. It can't be new. It's just something
you're repeating that you've done
before. So, you have to realize that
there is some level of uncertainty that
comes with anything that is new. So, I
think just accepting that is a good
starting place. The the second thing is
that you don't need to figure it all out
today. Like one of the frameworks that I
like, I think I heard this originally
from Sean Puri. He said ABC. Okay, so A
is an honest assessment of your current
situation. Look, try to look at your
current reality with clear eyes. Z is
where you ultimately want to end up. And
B is your next step. And all you need to
know is A, B, and Z. You don't need to
know steps C through Y. But so often
people will convince themselves, well, I
don't know what steps C through Y are.
or even if they realize they're not
going to plan it all out, they're like,
"Yeah, but I kind of want to know what
C, D, and E are." You know, they want to
be able to see a little bit further into
the future. But you have to become
comfortable with some level of
uncertainty. There's that quote, I just
shared it in my newsletter recently. I
think it's from Ian Wilson. He was a GE
executive where he said, "No amount of
information is going to allay the fact
that all of your knowledge is about the
past and all of your decisions are about
the future." It's just a fundamental
reality of life. Knowledge is purely
about the past and what has been learned
and decisions are purely about the
future and what cannot be predicted. And
so you have to become okay with with
that reality. In a lot of ways, I
actually think the most powerful form of
mental toughness, the most powerful or
resilient form of preparation is a
mindset that can handle uncertainty. You
know, it's the we all we all try to
resist this, you know, we try to control
reality. We try to predict scenarios and
outcomes. We try to figure out what's
going to happen ahead of time. But
really all you need is not to predict
the future. What you need is the
confidence that you can handle
uncertainty. That that whatever happens,
I will be able to figure it out. I think
if I was going to encapsulate
entrepreneurship in a nutshell, I would
say it is the trust and the willingness
that you can figure it out. Um, it's the
it's there's always going to be some
point on the curve with your business
where you're like, well, we're not quite
sure what the future's going to bring.
You know, I have a podcast and who knows
how AI is going to change that, but if
you're if you trust that you can figure
it out, great. You can be an
entrepreneur. You'll make, you know,
you'll figure it out along the way.
>> How do we develop that mindset
practically? Like
>> I think that it's practiced in small
ways and then it accumulates over time.
So, um, I don't think sports is the only
way to do this, but it's the way that I
did it. So, I'll use it as an example.
There are many ways you could do it. Um,
one thing that's great about sports is
that you have to fail publicly. Um, you
know, so you I played I played baseball
all the way through college, played it
for 17 years of my life and um, you
know, the early years you're in T-ball
or little league or whatever and you're
playing and then you make an error. That
does not feel good, right? Like you let
the whole team down, but you realize
that life goes on. You failed publicly
and you move forward. Um later when I
was in college, you know, we're not only
playing games together, we're also
training together in the gym. You show
up in the gym, you look at the guy next
to you, you realize he's a little bit
stronger than you. That doesn't feel
great. You see that? Then you're like,
"Well, let me try to set a new PR. I'll
throw five more pounds on the bar." You
fail in front of everybody. You miss
that lift.
>> That doesn't feel good. But
>> you move on. 30 seconds later, you get
back to it and you go do the next thing.
And it happens again and again in small
ways. But failing publicly trains your
mind. It teaches you that what matters
most is not that you always win, but
that you always keep reaching, that you
always keep striving. In a lot of ways,
the real important question to ask is
not what can I succeed on or what can I
achieve, but what is worth reaching for,
you know, and that's really what you
want is to keep reaching, to keep
striving. And as you train that muscle
and develop it in all those little small
ways, eventually you get to a point
where you can handle it in big ways. You
know, I remember my senior year, my my
final season, um I said like, I don't
want us to lose, but if we're going to
lose, I want to be the one who's
playing, you know, like put me out
there. I can handle I can take the loss,
you know, I don't want to lose, but I
can handle it. Um and I feel that way
now, too, about stuff that I do, you
know, in business. I put everything that
I had into the Atomic Habits launch, you
know, like I we started planning that
launch 15 months ahead of time. Um, and
I in a lot of places in life, good
enough is good enough, but every now and
then you find an area where good enough
is not good enough and you want to do it
the best you can do it. And I decided
that for me, that was one of those
things that I was going to try to do as
good as I could possibly do it. And that
comes with risk. That comes with
vulnerability. You know, you're going to
spend your next year and a half
promoting and pushing and talking about
this thing that you poured three to five
years of your life into. What if people
hate it? What if the reviews aren't any
good? You know, what if you secure big
interviews and you go on morning shows
and then the book flops and it doesn't
sell? Um, what if the publisher is mad
at me because they paid me in advance or
they were expecting it to do well and
then it doesn't perform? And like you
sit with all those questions and my
thought I think partially because I had
trained that muscle uh over time was I
can handle it you know like if it if we
lose I'll I'll deal with it you know and
you'll be fine. Um but you have I think
once you have that confidence then you
have the confidence to go for it fully
you know the problem is if you don't
have that confidence you start talking
yourself out of it. You water it down.
You know you don't promote it all the
way. you don't do all the things you
could do because you're kind of scared
of what the result could be. What if it
doesn't go well? So then I don't go all
the way in and then it kind of becomes a
self-fulfilling prophecy because it for
sure isn't going to work that well if
you don't give it everything you have.
>> As you're saying that, the thing that
comes to mind is like the difference
between playing to win and playing not
to lose
>> and the hesitation that comes with
playing not to lose versus like just
going for it.
>> Yeah.
There's in the World Cup final, women's
World Cup a couple years ago, uh the US
beat Japan and Carly Lloyd scored like
three goals in that game. Um and I think
the third of her goal she kicked from
midfield. It was like just super long,
but she the cool thing about that play
is that she saw the opportunity to go
for it [clears throat] and she went for
it right away. She never talked herself
out of it. It was a shot that you would
never take in most circumstances. It's
not a good shot. It's not a high
percentage shot. Um, but she saw an
opening and she went for it. There was
no hesitation. Um, similarly, totally
different domain. Uh, one time my wife
and I, my wife's, I'm not very musical
at all, but my wife is, and we were
listening to Zack Brown Band play a
song, and she was like, "One thing I
love about listening to him sing is that
there's no hesitation in his voice. When
he when it comes time to sing the lyric,
he's like fully in it. Um, he's not like
secondguessing himself or doubting
himself. There's like singing with
confidence." And so in all these
different domains, sports, music,
business, you can't have that
hesitation. You know, you don't want to
be the one talking yourself out of it. I
think uh for me, I try to not be my own
bottleneck. You know, I I don't want to
have I don't want to be the first person
to tell myself no.
>> You know, I want the world to tell me no
first and then I'll and then I'll adjust
based on the feedback that I get, but I
don't want to talk myself out of it. One
of my little sayings internally is like
I try to work backwards from magic. So
what would the magical outcome be and
then let me try to figure out a couple
different paths that could potentially
get me there and I'll start to take
steps forward and then I'll get feedback
from the world. You know, I don't tell
myself no. Maybe the world will tell me
no and I need to adjust the course. But
I start with the magical outcome and
then go from there. And what you find, I
mean, I see it with family. I see it
with friends. Like so many people that
I'm around,
>> almost always you talk yourself out of
it before the world actually prevents
you from doing it there. It's very rare
that you truly run up against a hard
stop in the world where they say,
"Sorry, this isn't possible. What you're
trying to do is it can't happen. There's
almost always somebody else you could
have talked to, another approach you
could have taken, another attempt you
could have gone for, and you're the one
who talks yourself out of doing it. Um,
not the world." And so I try to not be
that person. I try to, you know, give
myself permission to go for it and then
adjust along the way.
>> I love these little sayings you have.
You move like thunder, [laughter]
>> you know, work backwards from magic.
What other internal sayings do you have
that really resonate with you in this
moment?
>> Um, one of the biggest things I learned
from my grandfather was he his little
saying was PMA, positive mental
attitude. So in any scenario you try to
have a positive outlook regardless of
the current circumstances. And that
sounds a little kind of woo wooey
sometimes or you know always think
positive or whatever but I have tried to
become better at practicing it and
teaching my kids how to practice it. So,
one way that you can do it is when you
run up against something that feels kind
of difficult or feels like um you don't
feel confident about it, you try to
rehearse it visually and you emphasize
the good portions of what could happen.
And this can this can happen either in
retrospect or it can happen uh
previsualization before the thing
happens. So, I'll give you two examples.
In retrospect, when I played baseball
and I was like 10 or 12 or 14, after
each season, we would go sit on the back
deck at my parents house and my dad and
I would talk about the g the year and we
would talk about the good plays from the
year, my best plays, my best games, the
games that we won. We would we would try
to highlight I didn't know this at the
time, but what he was doing was he was
helping me highlight the wins from, you
know, small and big from that last
season. And uh I can remember some of
the conversations that we had like one I
I got into high school and I was never
the best player on any team that I was
on. But he was like, "Look, if you just
keep sticking with it, what you're going
to find is that guys will drop off each
year, you know, and so by just by
there's this power of longevity of
staying in the game that will benefit
you." And he was right. I I became a
better player every year that I played.
Um so that's like a retrospective one.
you are you emphasizing your wins and
then the looking forward if you do like
a previsisualization version of it. So,
I have a couple kids. Um, one of them is
three and starting preschool. And, uh,
he went to preschool on the first day.
He had a hard drop off. He he didn't
like it. Don't, you know, don't leave
me. I don't know what this place is. It
feels, you know, scary, whatever. So, he
had a tough day getting dropped off the
first time. Second day comes, same
thing. Kind of cries a little bit. Has a
tough day when he gets dropped off. So,
the third day, um, I get them up in the
morning and I get get them ready and get
them breakfast and stuff. So, I'm in the
kitchen. I said, "All right, guys.
Today's a preschool day." And
immediately he was like and I was like
hold on hold on hold on. Um [snorts]
you like your teachers, right? Miss
Jaylen, Miss Caitlyn, don't you like
them? He's like, "Yeah." And I was like,
"Okay. Um what did you guys do
yesterday? You got to play with the
crayons and the glue sticks. Like that
was fun, wasn't it?" He was like,
"Yeah." Um I said, "You have snack time
and lunch. Like that those are good
things." He's like, "Yeah." And then I
said, "After school, you go play on the
playground. You get to go down the
slides and everything." He's like,
"Yeah, yeah." And that was all I said,
you know, but what I'm trying to do is
to get him to emphasize the positive
portions of what's about to come, to
imagine what it would be like for the
day to be good. And um he went I don't
know, maybe we just got lucky, but he
went and he had a great drop off that
day, you know, and he's he's loved it
every day since. He's he's been fine.
And so you can see how that skill can be
applied throughout life. You know,
they're in fourth grade and they're
getting ready to give their first
presentation and they feel nervous about
talking in front of the class. Great.
let's walk through this and emphasize
what the good parts are going to be. Um
or you know they're getting they're in
eighth grade and they're going to go to
their first school dance and they feel
weird and awkward about it. Like let's
talk about what a good night would look
like. And so so many of your problems in
life come from your brain
overemphasizing
minor details, the wrong minor details.
And what I'm trying to do with both
myself and my kids and the people around
me is to encourage them to emphasize
good minor details. um you know to what
what portion of the day are you latching
on to and what story are you telling
yourself and so the more that you can do
that I it's kind of like a muscle the
more that you do it the better you get
at it and that's ultimately that goes
back to that PMA positive mental
attitude that you know my grandpa taught
me um and so that's another one of my
little
>> I love that I want to talk about
reputation I want to hear maybe I'll
just say the word and like you can riff
on it for a few minutes
>> reputation like my reputation or how I
think about it how I think about
reputation
I don't really think about it that much.
Um I'm not I'm not that worried about
it. Um
I guess the main way that I think about
it is I want to be known as someone who
is useful. You know, like useful is a
word that I come back to a lot. If you
if you uh Josh Kaufman has a good
framework. It's like three things. I
think it's true, useful, and clear. Um
you know, it's like you want to write
things that are true and accurate. You
want to write things that are useful and
actionable. And you want to be clear and
understandable in how you do it. I think
that that does describe a lot of my
approach and how I'm trying to focus on,
you know, putting work into the world.
Um,
all right. So, I guess I don't think
about my reputation that much, but this
is how I generally think about
reputation, status, brand, whatever.
Ultimately, your reputation will be the
work, the quality of the work that you
do. So, it is, I think Brent Behore said
at one point, it's like the range of
outcomes that you can expect from a
brand. Um, and so the more that you do
things that are high quality and useful
and valuable and actionable, the more
that you will become known for that.
Now, there is a little bit of priming
that can go on. So, like at the top of
321, my newsletter, it says uh the most
wisdom per word of any newsletter on the
web. I'm trying to set an expectation
there, right? Like it's when somebody
signs up and subscribes and they read
that. Now you see that and you're like,
"Okay, I'm about to read something that
has a lot of wisdom and is like dense
and informative. There's a lot of signal
and very little noise." That's the the
tone I'm trying to set. Now, the flip
side of that is you have to deliver.
>> And so if you if you set that
expectation and you don't actually
deliver, well, it's not going to go very
well. And so I'm also putting the
responsibility on me a little bit. You
know, there's like nothing to hide
behind. I do this with my Instagram
account. It's like a very weird
Instagram account. you know, there's no
photos of me. It's just text. Um, but
it's kind of like a peacock's tail, you
know, in the sense that it's a very
useful hindrance. Like, it's very visual
visual and it shows which peacocks are
uh strong enough to have this kind of
superfluous tail to still survive and
escape predators. Those are the ones
that have great genes. Well, when you
can't hide behind anything else on your
Instagram account and it's just words,
the ideas have to be good enough. you
know, it's a it's a useful uh hindrance.
It's a useful um blockage to getting
people's attention. And so I'm like,
well, if it's just going to be words,
they better be pretty good. So, um I
think about setting those priming those
expectations and setting those standards
and then also trying to reach them. But
ultimately, it's just about the quality
of the work that you do. And so, the
more that you show up with value and
useful ideas, uh the more you become
known for that. Um, I think I also, this
is kind of connected to reputation, but
I I don't think about shaping it for me
that much, but
the lens should be mostly focused on the
reader, not on yourself. I think if you
if you think a lot about reputation and
you're trying to like cultivate this
image, that's the energy is focused in
the wrong direction. Um, if you're
focused on the reader, then you start
asking different questions. How can I
create something that's incredibly
useful for somebody? How can I make it
more actionable? How can I make it
easier to understand and simpler? How
can I make it easy enough that I can
teach it? Um, now all those questions
are focused on the reader, you know,
view or their from their position. And
then there's also just questions like
what do people need right now? You know,
like what what is what does somebody
what would Yeah, what are people asking
for? Um, and trying to pay attention to
that. So, for the most part, I think
reputation takes care of itself if you
try to take care of other people. Um,
and if your if your lens is focused on
them, then it ends up, you know, working
just fine for you.
>> I love that. Thanks. What about
positioning?
>> Positioning is critical. Um, positioning
is something that I
think a lot about. I don't think I have
it figured out yet, but I have seen how
powerful it can be. Um, so let me give
you a couple examples. I'll start with
positioning for books and then I'll
start talking about positioning for
life. So
any product, the way that it is
positioned and packaged is probably 50%
of its success. Um, a couple examples
from books. Atomic Habits has a chapter
later in it where I talk about
deliberate practice. It could have been
a book about deliberate practice where I
talk about habits, but instead it's a
book about habits where I talk about
deliberate practice. And I think the way
those two books would sell, the
difference is enormous. Um, if you don't
know what deliberate practice is, it
takes 30 seconds to unpack it and
describe it. How is it different than
regular practice and so on. You don't
get 30 seconds when somebody's thinking
about buying a book. You're not there at
the store to explain it to them. So, the
packaging, the positioning of the book,
which I would describe as pretty much
anything that you see on the cover, has
to sell itself in 7 seconds, you know.
Um, and just by virtue of growing up in
society and being part of the world, you
know that having good habits is
favorable and having bad habits is
unfavorable. And I don't need to sell
anybody on that. All I need to sell you
on is, hey, if you only read one book
about habits, Atomic Habits should be
the one. And that's a much different
pitch. Um, and so the positioning and
packaging makes a big difference.
Another example, one that, um, so
Author's Equity is this book publisher
that I helped co-found. We have a book
coming out uh called the overthinkers's
guide to making decisions and that is
basically a book about choices. It's a
book about choosing and making
decisions. It could have been called
something else you know it could have
been called the decision guide or the
power of choice or something you know it
could have been called that. But the
overthinker's guide to making decisions
is a great package. It's a great frame.
I have told multiple people about it and
they the reply to me has been oh I need
that. Um and that's usually a sign that
you got the packaging right is that you
know people are interested in that way.
So um those are two examples of
positioning for products and I think any
any product
the positioning and packaging is a
critical part of the success. Um
before I go on to positioning about life
I just want to mention a few things that
make uh for good positioning. So
a lot of this is are principles from
direct response copywriting. It's a good
domain to study or good a good place to
look for examples. But one of the core
principles of direct response
copywriting is that you should try to
solve or address a timeless and enduring
desire that people have.
>> And so many books and other products,
but I I think a lot about books. So many
books um are kind of adjacent to a
desire people have. They're not the
actual desire. And then you're kind of
in this uphill battle where you're
trying to convince somebody to pay
attention to something that they don't
actually care about. But you want to
address a timeless and enduring desire.
So, um, a lot of what makes for a really
good book title is part of what makes
for good packaging. So, good book titles
usually have three or four qualities.
The first quality is it addresses a
timeless or enduring desire. The second
quality is it tells you what the book is
actually about, which sounds kind of
obvious, but a lot of the time people
kind of like keyword stuff titles, you
know, they say like how to make
millions, be happy, and live the dream.
And you're like, that's not even what
this book is about, but whatever. Um,
the second thing that or the third thing
that they do is that they are
an unmistakable or an ownable phrase.
So, what that usually means is that it's
a little bit weird when you first hear
it. M
>> a lot of the really iconic book titles
they are phrases that you do not hear
elsewhere in life. So um man's search
for meaning basically you only hear that
in the book title. Nobody uses that
phrase in daily life.
>> How to win friends and influence people
even to even now describing it as
winning friends sounds kind of odd you
know but it's it's odd enough that
there's no mistaking what you're talking
about. They can own the real estate in
the reader's mind.
>> Atomic habits. Before the book came out,
you would not describe a habit as
atomic. You might have said it was
little or small or tiny or something
like that, but you wouldn't say atomic.
It It's a weird way to describe a small
habit, but that's good because you can
own that phrase. So, um, unmistakable
uh, addresses a timeless or enduring
desire, tells you what the book is
actually about. And the final piece is
that usually there's an element of
contrast, some element of surprise. So,
Rich Dad, Poor Dad, or um the
life-changing magic of tidying up. I
thought tidying up was a small thing.
Now you're telling me it's
life-changing. Um
>> atomic habits, tiny changes, remarkable
results. You know, you want some kind of
contrast between sometimes it's small to
big, sometimes it's the easy thing, the
easy thing you can do to accomplish the
hard thing. But there needs to be some
form of contrast. A good example that's
not like a self-help book or a business
book is um astrophysics for people in a
hurry by Neil deGrasse Tyson. I thought
astrophysics was something that was
going to take seven years in a PhD. No,
actually just read this book in an hour
and a half.
>> And so the contrast is um is something
that's compelling.
>> So if you have those four elements that
usually leads to good positioning and
packaging.
>> All right. So that's just on the product
side. Separately there's a whole other
discussion about positioning which is
like life positioning.
>> Yeah. How can you put yourself in good
positions for things to happen? And
there are so many ways that you could do
this. I'm sure that you can think of
many, too. Um, sometimes it's just about
putting yourself in positions for good
things to happen. So, we talked earlier
about sharing your work publicly. Every
episode that you publish, every blog
post that you put out, every social
media post that you put up is a little
bit of surface area that somebody could
discover and you could, you know, have
some interesting interaction.
um for Atomic Habits on launch day. I
had an interview on CBS this morning and
um
>> I remember that. Yeah, it was it was a
big um it was a big moment for me
because it changed the launch of the
book from hey some guy is releasing a
book to this is a thing you know here's
a piece of national media it's people
are paying attention basically it made
it feel credible and real and the way
that it happened is I wrote an article
blog post on my site four years earlier
uh called the physics of productivity
and it was just me trying to be clever
taking Newton's three laws and applying
them to productivity
And it sat there for four years and it
it was fine. It was an average article.
It didn't go viral or anything, but it
did fine. And then a year before Atomic
Habits came out, a reporter at the New
York Times stumbled across my website
and liked it and they linked to it in an
article. Well, some producer at CBS read
that article and was like, "Hey, can we
have you come on and talk about those
productivity principles?" So, I went on
and I did a segment for CBS about a year
before the book came out. It was it was
maybe like 10 months or something. And
um I did that segment for like three
minutes, just a little interview. And as
soon as it got done, I went to Gail King
and I said, "I have a book coming out in
10 months, and I want to come back on
the show and talk about it when it's
ready." And she said, "Sure, we'll have
you back on. You just need to be make
sure that we're your first interview.
Like, we want to have the first, you
know, release." I said, "Deal. What's
your email address?" Um and so I got her
email and I sent it to um my publisher
and we got it all linked up. So
when I wrote that article four years
earlier, I had no idea that that was
going to work out like that, you know,
but it was a little bit of surface area.
I was putting myself in a position for
good things to happen by trying to
create something of value in an enduring
format. You know, again, we talked about
what has a long halfife. That blog post
had a halfife of at least four years.
>> Um and um I put myself in a good
position for things to break my way. you
don't know how it's going to happen, but
you know if you try your best each time
and you keep creating some surface area,
you're going to catch a break at some
point. So that's like a business
example. Um there are tons of examples
with margin of safety, especially with
finances. You know, if you give yourself
a large margin of safety, in other
words, your expenses for your life are
much less than what you're taking in,
you can handle a lot of things coming
your way. And so that is positioning
yourself well for the unexpected
elements of life. Um you know we have a
family um situation with some medical
stuff and there were you know there was
some customized medical equipment that
somebody needed because of what they
were dealing with and it's $200,000 and
it's like it's a huge expense. Um but if
you give yourself a huge margin of
safety and you've been saving for years,
you don't know what that's going to be,
right? It could be that. It could be I
so one of my little things that I'll say
sometimes is like life is going to come
for you.
>> You just don't know when you don't know
when it will be your turn, but it will
come for you. There will be something.
Um so that that expense was not our
turn. But a couple years later, my wife
fell and broke her knee into four pieces
and I had to take six months off of
work. I'm like super thankful to
previous James, right? like James from
10 years earlier that built this
business where I could actually take six
months off of work to take care of her
and the kids because what was I going to
do if I didn't have that margin of
safety? But I put myself in a position
where I was able to make that happen.
And so each year I look at my position
both in terms of like flexibility and in
terms of finances and I just I don't
really even care about our net worth
that much. What I care about is am I in
a stronger position this year? you know,
like as long as each year it's getting a
little bit stronger, the margin of
safety gets a little bit larger, um the
ability to handle stress or uncertainty
gets a little bit better, then you know,
you're positioning yourself better each
year. And so there are lots of ways to
apply that positioning concept.
>> Just a slight off track here. Um how are
you investing that money these days?
>> Um yeah, I don't know that uh I don't
know that I want to talk about my
personal investments, but I will talk
about my personal philosophy. I guess
I'll say that. Yeah,
>> I um
eventually I realized uh that you can
beat the market but you will lose your
life. Um and so what I mean is that it
is possible to get outsized returns but
you have to spend all your time doing
it. And I don't want to be a VC or an
investment advisor or you know like
somebody who's I don't know trying to be
the next Buffett or Munger or whatever.
It's not how I want to spend my time.
You know you only get one precious life
and I want to spend it on other things.
I want mostly I want to spend it
creating, you know, trying to make
things that didn't exist before um and
spending time with family. And so I'm
kind of optimizing for that. So if you
can be okay with that, then you realize,
well, maybe there's very different ways
or simpler ways to invest your money.
Like um I'm a huge advocate of J.
Collins and the simple path to wealth
that that book um he his approach I
think is great, which is mostly just
like dump it in Vanguard and let it
ride. Um, but it's incredibly simple and
I get all my time back. And if I'm
making 12% a year rather than 15% a
year, who cares? Um, you know, like I'd
rather trade the 3% a year and get to
spend my hours the way that I want. So,
um, a lot of my a lot of my approach is
based around that, around simplifying
and trying to make sure that I protect
my time more than trying to squeeze out
um, additional percentage points beyond
what the market makes. You know there I
heard this other phrase once which is
remember that the goal is not to beat
the market. The goal is to end up
wealthy. Um you know like so many people
are focused on beating the market that
they lose all their time um and uh end
up I don't know in many cases not even
beating the market. Yeah. So um it just
gives you gives you a little bit of a
different approach. And I think also
I
investing in Vanguard is incredibly
diversified because you got a slice of
every company. I have realized that I do
not have the ability to predict what is
going to go well.
>> Yeah.
>> And I feel even more that way now than I
did a year or two ago. Things are moving
so fast. The rise of AI, whatever. Like
I really I cannot tell you what
companies are going to be at the top of
the Fortune 500 in three years or 10
years. Like I I have no confidence in
>> they may not even exist.
>> Yeah. I I I have no confidence in it. So
um I I would rather not try to pick the
winners and instead just play the
general trend. I wanted to ask you about
your reading habit and how you take what
you're reading and incorporate it into
what you're doing or thinking about or
make it top of mind. It's so easy to
read something and sort of put it down
and then forget about it.
>> I wrote two articles a week for three
years when I started out um every Monday
and Thursday. And about a year in I hit
100,000 subscribers and I had this
conversation with myself. I don't know
why but I got kind of in my head about
that number and I thought well now a lot
of people are paying attention so it
needs to be really good.
>> What I should have just said was things
are going very well. Just keep doing
what you're doing. Right. But um but I
thought, well, if I really want to make
it good, then I should spend more time
writing it,
>> right?
>> And what happened is things got worse,
not better. And eventually what I
realized is that um if I want to be a
better writer, what I needed was not to
write more, but to read more. And it's
kind of like uh filling a car up with
gas. You know, reading is like filling
the car up. Writing is like driving and
going on a journey. And you need both.
You know, like the point is not just to
sit at the gas station all day and keep
filling the car up. Like the tank is
already full. Yeah. You should go go out
and see something. But if you just keep
driving, you end up stranded on the side
of the road. And so for me, reading is
the primary way that I generate
inspiration and ideas. Almost every
thought that you have is downstream from
what you consume. It's so rare. There's
there's even a debate among
neuroscientists whether it's even
possible to have a spontaneous thought,
truly spontaneous thought.
>> You know, you say something to me or ask
me a question and that sparks a thought
or somebody cuts you off in traffic and
that makes you feel a certain way or
whatever. But it's just an endless
string of you responding to the
situations and inputs that come to you
throughout the day. So, we don't usually
give it this amount of weight, but when
you choose who you follow on social
media, when you choose what podcasts to
listen to, when you choose what books to
read, you are choosing your future
thoughts.
>> Yeah.
>> And if you want better, more productive,
more creative thoughts, you need better,
more productive, more creative inputs.
And so, uh, choosing what to read or
choosing what to listen to or who to
subscribe to is actually a very weighty
decision. And it's a very important
decision. Um
I I find that my reading habit now
there's there's some quote about Emerson
I think where he says he reads like a
hawk flying over a field scanning for
prey. Um and I kind of feel like that's
how I read a lot of the time. I'm almost
reading for like ideas or for chapters,
not for books. You know, I'm looking for
the piece that is relevant to what I'm
writing about at the time or what I'm
trying to learn at the time. uh I'm not
just sitting down and saying well let me
read and unpack this argument for fun. I
maybe when I do if I am at a stage in my
life at some point where I'm doing less
writing maybe I will read for that that
way more you know just for enjoyment or
for uh knowledge for knowledge's sake
but right now I'm kind of reading more
for knowledge uh for an outcome which is
for me to distill it and apply it in
some actionable way and then share it
with the world.
>> So what does that look like? Like you're
reading a book, are you highlighting?
Are you taking that highlight and
putting it into like a word document?
Like if I read a book that's really good
and relevant to what I'm working on at
the time, it's very hard for me to make
progress on it. I will it might take me
like seriously I might spend I mean at
this point I'm I'm not working as much
cuz we have all these kids. But um uh
but I like it might take me four hours
to get through three pages like because
there's I'm reading I'm at a point in
the book where it's just really hitting
on what I've been like kind of stewing
on and thinking about and it's sparking
ideas. So I'll read a sentence or a
paragraph and I'm like I got to write
about this for a second and then I you
know I I may end up writing two pages
and then I go back and I read some more
and then I you know write some more. um
when it's not as intense as that uh then
it'll be more what I do is I I prefer to
read physical books. I also audio can
also be helpful for me especially if I'm
in the car a lot or something. It's just
a you know obviously it's a better way
to do that but um it can be helpful for
me especially if a book is kind of
dense. I find audio is better because it
doesn't if the book is really dense, I
will slow myself down too much as I'm
reading it in print, but audio just
keeps rolling and I still get the idea,
but I don't slow myself down through the
writing. So, I find some authors to be
better for me in audio. But, um, my
preference is to read the physical book
as I roll through. I find passages that
interest me and I put a parenthesy open
parenthesis at the beginning of the
passage, close it at the end and then I
put a star in the margin so that if I
just leaf through the book, I find the
stars and I can easily identify those
passages.
>> And then once I finish the book, I will
go back through and take photos of each
of those and highlight the photo uh on
my iPhone and just copy and paste it
into uh like an Evernote file or you
know, Google Doc or wherever I'm storing
that stuff at. So, um, that's my typical
approach. So, I that's how I end up with
like usually if I read a book that I
highlight a lot on, maybe it'll have 50
or something passages and all those get
dumped in at the end.
>> I just have to ask one follow-up to
that, which is and then what? So, it
goes into Evernote. Now, a lot of people
do this. They capture these notes, but
then they never Yeah.
>> revisit them. They never do anything
with them.
>> I don't like having I I tried this for a
while. I've I mean, you know, I've been
>> Evernote. I've been well I've been doing
it for a long time. Um it's just it's
just 12 years old, you know. Um Notion
wasn't even around when I was getting
started. But um so I just have a lot of
stuff in there now. But um
I tried for a little while doing it
based on the book. So I would I would
finish a book and then I would put all
the highlights into the book dock, you
know, and so I just have all the notes
from that book in one place. Um, but
what happened was what you just
described, which is then it would just
sit there and I would never really look
at it. Occasionally I would work on an
article and I would like search for
terms in Evernote and then find a
passage from a book and maybe pull it in
or something, but it was pretty rare
that that would happen. Instead, what I
find more useful now is to have a
project that I'm working on and a um a
dock for the project. So like the next
book I'm writing for example and then
I'm reading books that are relevant to
that project and I take the passages and
I drop them into the appropriate place
in that doc. So usually the way that I
start writing a book I try to have the
concept the big picture concept nailed
at the start. Like I knew Atomic Habits
was going to be a habits book from the
beginning. It was going to be a book
about building good habits and breaking
bad ones. So that can go at the top of
the dock.
>> Then I start at first at the very very
beginning I just collect notes and
ideas. It's just and maybe it gets to be
20 or 30 pages and it's just a bunch of
random stuff. But eventually once you
get enough material in there, I start
grouping it by section and eventually
those sections become chapter chapters.
And that's usually for most of the
process that's usually what the doc
looks like is it's just sort of a
loosely structured chapter. This is a
chapter about leverage. This is a
chapter about tailwinds. This is, you
know, whatever. And when I read and I
have something that's relevant to a
chapter, it gets copied and pasted into
there. So it starts to the chapters end
up the part of my process that's that
part is just a lot of fun. What I just
described to you that that's just fun to
me. I get to read. I'm excited about it.
I dump it all in. It gets organized.
That that part can be great.
>> Um I have two manuscripts right now. One
is 500 pages, one is 600 pages. That is
just that. It's just a bunch of stuff
that I've read that is organized around
the book concept. The very unfun part is
taking it from 600 pages of roughly
organized notes and turning it into
chapters that can be readable. Um, and
it gets compressed along the way from
600 pages down to 200. And so that takes
a lot more work, [laughter]
>> but that work is what makes it so easy
for the reader to read.
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's what makes it good.
Um, and that's that's also what's hard.
I mean, sometimes people will complain
and say, "Oh, you know, writing is
hard." And like, yeah, writing is hard,
but also that's kind of the point, you
know, like it's it's also like lifting.
It'd be like complaining about lifting
weights and the weights being heavy.
You're like, yes, the weights are heavy
and that's what's getting you stronger.
You know, like writing is hard because
it's making you a better thinker. It is
forcing you, the act of writing is
forcing you to clarify your thoughts.
The act of lifting the weight is forcing
your muscles to get stronger. And so, it
only works because it is hard. If it was
easy, it would not require much thought,
which means it also doesn't require much
reorganization in your mind, and you're
not learning very much or clarifying
very much.
>> After the success of Atomic Habits, the
inbound must be crazy. How do you
maintain the focus on the things that
you want with all these opportunities
available to you?
>> I'm kind of a slow learner, honestly.
Like, I it took me a while to figure it
out, and I don't know that I have it
fully figured out now. it seems like the
bar keeps changing or moving. You know,
partially I think it's a good thing. If
you're really successful and things are
going well, then every year your
opportunity cost should increase. But
what that also means is every year you
should be saying no to things that you
were saying yes to the previous year.
And so I feel like I'm always 3 to 6
months behind on what I should be saying
no to. Um, when the book came out, it it
did well from the start, but it really
didn't take off till about a year in.
So, it it hit the bestseller list the
first week, then nothing um until New
Year's week, and then nothing for like
six more months. And it wasn't really
till like the summer of the second year
that it started appearing every week.
Um, so 2019 was the year, 2018 it came
out, 2019 was the year that like
everything changed. And um there was a
stretch in like 2019 and early 2020
where I just felt like I'm on the hook
for all these things that I should have
said no to. Um eventually I had to do
like harder things like put the email
inbox on an autoresponder and like uh
like that runs like kind of counter to
what I wanted to do, you know, like I
for the first 10,000 people who signed
up to my email list, I emailed each of
them individually and said like hey
thanks so much for joining, you know,
I'd love to have you in the community.
I'll be writing about this, you know,
whatever. And then, you know, you get to
100,000 or a million or, you know, you
just can't do that stuff anymore. So,
um, yeah, it's like best possible
outcome, right? Like, you don't want to
complain about it. It's what could be
better. But, um, also it just takes a
lot of learning and reminding yourself
that you have to continue to increase
that filter.
>> Are there any lessons that you took away
that you wish you would have known
sooner about filtering or selecting
opportunities? There are lots of things
that I think about now strategically for
what I want to focus on that I didn't
really have a language for at the time.
You kind of like follow your gut or you
your intuition, but so I'll give you a
couple. Um,
not everything that you do can match all
the qualities that check all the boxes
that I'm about to cover, but I think
about each of these boxes and how do
they weave together? So like one thing
is leverage. How can I get more output
out of each unit of effort? And so some
things are much higher leverage than
others. You know, like writing, let's
just take writing as an example. Writing
in a journal or a diary is fine. It's
very useful for you. It might help you
think more clearly. Like writing has
lots of benefits. But if you choose to
take what you write and share it
publicly, well, now all of a sudden you
have a lot more leverage with that.
Other people can find it. It becomes
this kind of like honeypot that attracts
like-minded people. You know, I I like
to say that sharing your work publicly
is like a magnet and it just draws other
people to you who are interested in the
same thing. It's probably one of the
most useful things you can do for
networking is it's not actually
networking. It's just sharing your
knowledge and trying to be useful in
public. Um so leverage is one thing to
think about. How can I get more output
out of the hours that I'm putting in? Um
one question that I really like is what
is the work that keeps working for me
once it's done? Mhm.
>> So like doing this podcast interview is
a good example. I when Atomic Habits
came out I did like 200 interviews in
like 6 months and um some were podcast
and some are radio and I don't really do
radio interviews anymore. And it's not
really cuz I have something personal
against radio. It's just that once we
get done with that 5 minute segment or
10-minute segment, we're off the air and
that work is not working for me anymore.
You know, the the time I just put in
evaporated. But this will get recorded,
you know, and somebody will watch it
today and then somebody will watch it in
a month. And you know, it's um it's
almost like there's two versions of
James out there. You know, there's like
the version that's out there living his
daily life and then there's the one that
got recorded right now that can keep
working each hour after it's done. So
that's that's one filter. Another thing
that I think about is sequencing. So
doing things in the right order or doing
things in an order where it accumulates
for you. I debated about whether to
self-publish Atomic Habits or
traditionally publish for like a year,
year and a half. I I was like really
close to trying to self-publish. Um, and
ultimately at the time, it's a little
bit easier now, but still quite hard to
hit a bestseller list as if you're
self-published. And I decided, well, if
I'm really going to go for it and try to
hit the New York Times list, I might as
well do it with my first book because
then I can be a New York Times
bestselling author for the rest of my
career. Um, there's no guarantee I was
going to do it, but it's like if you're
going to try, you might as well try
early and then you can get the benefit
of that status marker for the next 50
years rather than self-publishing your
first like five books and then doing it,
you know, in 20 years. So, that's just
kind of a, you know, a sequencing thing.
The other thing that I think about a lot
is how do I like it when the work that
I'm doing, every project that I'm
touching feeds each other in some way.
They kind of like cross-pollinate. Um so
a few examples I you know I'm writing
there's there's uh it's almost fractal
the way that you can think about this.
So like the small version is I write an
idea that idea could go on Twitter and
be used as a tweet. It could be in a
newsletter that I publish each week. It
could get repurposed onto Instagram as
like a quote card or something. Maybe if
it's good it could become the seed of
something that's a chapter in a book or
whatever. But it gets repurposed in lots
of ways. So that one hour again kind of
like leverage it's working for you in
more ways. How does it how does it
accumulate? How does it cross-pollinate?
You can also do it with platforms. So
like all of the platforms that I have
for my business point to each other, you
know, like when I post on Instagram, at
the bottom of each post says, you know,
want to learn more ideas like this? Sign
up for the newsletter at
jamesclair.com321
or go to jamesclair.com for more. Um the
book points to things. you know, you
read Atomic Habits and then at the end
of each section it says, you know, if
you want to get a PDF guide that
summarizes these key ideas, go to
atomichabits.com and, you know, you can
download it or whatever. So, the book's
pointing to the website, the website's
pointing to the book, the newsletter is
pointing to social media, social media
is pointing to the newsletter. It's all
like this web where everything is kind
of cross-pollinating.
I think some people that people get that
and they do it like once or twice or
seven times, but like you need to do it
every time, you know, like you're
building this very tight web. It's
you're building this network of things
that all accumulate together. And then
you can do it at an even larger level.
So like we we have the the writing idea,
the tweet idea, you have the platform
idea that's still within one business,
but you can even do it across
businesses. It's like I have my business
as a writer, you know, I'm an author and
I have my platforms, but I also
co-founded a publishing company,
Author's Equity. And so now the brand
that I have as an author helps me meet
other authors and talk to them. And if
it's a good fit, they can come and
publish with us. And so those two things
feed each other. I publish my books
through Author's Equity. Like it's, you
know, it's a way for those two
businesses to help each other. Um, and
then I have a I even have like a side
project which is this cabin in the woods
that I I built. you know, are building
this cabin and it can be a retreat
center for authors, you know, like we
can bring authors out there and we can
meet for two or three days and talk
about how to write books and launch
books and build your platform and some
of those people can publish with authors
equity and you can like see how
everything kind of feeds each each
other. So, it doesn't all work perfectly
together like that every time, but I
like when things can kind of check
multiple boxes. And then one of the one
of the other ones that I'll mention and
then I'll take a break for a second is
um tailwinds. So like I always think
about email lists. I don't we you know
you and I both have lots of friends who
have email lists and people are growing
at different rates, but basically
everybody I know's list is getting
bigger. I don't I don't know that I know
anybody whose list is shrinking. Um
unless it's like they're intentionally,
you know, trimming subscribers or
something. But uh more and more people
come online each day. More there still
are like you know a billion people in
the world that need internet access and
are coming on. So there's just this huge
tailwind of readers that and the
internet continues to grow and people
continue to subscribe to things. And so
it's just a good like place to play um
because there are lots of forces working
for you. So if you put all of those
things together you're like all right
there's a big tailwind on the internet
and building an audience. If you share
your work publicly, you gain leverage
and you can attract more people to your
work and you can, you know, become more
known or your work can get out there.
Um, if your platforms cross-pollinate,
they can kind of grow each other. That
same dynamic of a tailwind for, you
know, email list is also true for social
media and, you know, other platforms
online. And if you do this early in your
life and you build an audience early,
then you have tons of flexibility and
how you can use that and where you can
direct the attention or what you know
what businesses you want to build or
what projects you want to work on. So
all of that collectively just makes it
feel like all right, if you're doing
things that are in that zone, then it's
probably a really high leverage way to
spend your time. And I'm not saying
that's the only way you should spend
your time. Probably the the single
biggest thing that we haven't talked
about is are you excited about it? You
know, are you interested? are you
passionate about it? But um those are
some of the ways that I think about
focus and prioritization and selecting
and when things blew up, you know, we
put all this together and Atomic Habits
did really well. And then when things
blew up and my time got tight, you're
like, "Okay, you have all these." It
felt like for 10 years it was me trying
to knock on every door and window and be
like, "Hey, will you please pay
attention? Maybe like can you read
this?" And then all of a sudden
overnight it was like, whoa, way too
many people are paying attention. Um,
and so now I have to be more strict
about which things check those boxes and
where where I direct my time and
attention.
>> I love a couple of the themes we talked
about. I just want to circle back to
longevity of content.
>> Um, we published an interview this
summer, republished an interview that
was recorded six years ago
>> and nobody had any idea. So when you
think of like content and the long tail
of it, it's really fascinating. We don't
talk politics. We don't talk anything
topical. One of the reasons we do that
is we have great longevity of content.
>> Yeah.
>> I think that that's really important.
>> So that's one that I didn't mention, but
I do think about a lot. This I think
this is a little bit more my style and
what I'm interested in personally, but
it does, you know, there are ways that
you could apply it probably whatever
you're focused on, which is what's the
halflife of this idea. You know, you
want I like to work on things that have
a very long halflife. They they just
persist. And I even like to work in
formats that have a long half-life. Like
social media has a very short half-life.
And that's fine. It can serve a role in
the business, but I'm never going to
make it my central thing because
something like a blog post has a little
bit longer halfife, but a book really
has a long halflife. And so, um, I like
formats that are durable and persist in
that way. And so, you can Yeah. you
start to put all those different
elements together and I think you can
end up with something that's pretty
evergreen.
>> One thing you mentioned that I thought
was really interesting was the word
sequencing
>> and I'm wondering how you think about
that in terms of accomplishing your
goals but also in terms of like
different eras of your life.
>> Are your 20s different than your 30s,
your 30s and your 40s and your 40s and
your 50s?
>> Yeah, that's a great question. I I don't
know why, but I've been thinking a lot
about this recently. I guess you could
call it like life strategy or something,
but think about most of the big really
meaningful things in your life, you
know, like um raising a family that
you're proud of, building a great
marriage, creating a successful company,
getting in the best shape of your life,
you know, starting some new initiative,
or you know, giving back in some big
way. Like whatever it is, it's probably
a multi-year thing. You know, all the
those really big meaningful movements in
life are three, five, 10, sometimes
longer. you know, it's like it's a lot
of years. And if you just look broadly
at your adult life, you're like, well,
if I'm lucky enough to get to live to
say 80, I've got maybe five or six of
those, you know, 10-year movements in
there. Um, so what are you going to
spend those five or six on? You know,
they it's a limited number, whatever it
is. Some things five or six alone is
limited, but it's even more limited than
I think you realize at the beginning
because certain things don't make sense
in certain decades, you know, like if
you want to travel around the world for
a while and party in a visa, like you
probably aren't going to do that in your
70s, you know, like it's probably better
for your 20s or 30s. And um so the
sequencing of things starts to to
matter, too. Um building a company, I
think, is another one. you can do it
whenever you want, you know, like
there's no there are no rules, but man,
it sure is nice to like do it early and
then you get some of the advantages of
that uh as you go on. It seems that
responsibilities
uh and obligations tend to increase
throughout life. Each day that goes by
is an opportunity for
>> a responsibility to come into play or an
obligation or an obstacle that you
didn't foresee to come up. And so, if
you're waiting till your 40s or 50s to
start a company, again, there are no
rules. You can do it then. It's just
that you're playing the game on hard
mode a little bit uh or a harder mode. I
always say like I started my first
business when I was 24
and I had no kids and I wasn't married.
It was as easy as it could be and it was
still really hard. Yeah.
>> Um you know so anyway that's I I think
about sequencing in that way. Um and
some of the questions I like to ask to
there are two that really feel relevant
to this. The first is what season am I
in right now? You know, life has
different seasons and um sometimes
you want to focus on earning money.
Sometimes you want to focus on time with
family. Sometimes you want to focus on
creativity or you know creative freedom,
the ability to choose what projects you
work on. Sometimes you just want it to
be a personal season, you know, and it's
less about work. But whatever the answer
is, it's probably really specific to
you. And um it helps to figure out what
season you're in right now because when
your seasons change, your habits often
need to change. You know, what you focus
on often needs to change. And so the the
question that I think is closely tied to
this, which is a a good one from Derek
Civers, is what am I optimizing for
right now? And so I, you know, if I
don't know what to optimize for, I feel
like it's good to optimize for
enthusiasm. What lights me up? But
whatever that answer is right now, what
are you optimizing for? It helps you
determine what season you're in. And I
found that a lot of the time when I'm
struggling or I'm facing some sort of uh
I feel like I'm facing a lot of
friction, it's because I'm trying to
force fit old habits into a new season.
You know, I keep I keep trying to do
things the way I was doing it and then
eventually I realize, oh, okay, stop
being a dummy about this. Like you're in
a new season now. So, I think sequencing
um starts with self-awareness. It starts
with knowing what season you're in and
what you're optimizing for, what's
important to you at this stage of your
life. And then once you realize that,
you can start to figure out, you know,
which pieces should I focus on next.
>> Let's explore habits a little. Um, what
exactly is a habit?
>> The one one that I like is that a habit
is a recurring solution to a recurring
problem in your environment. So
something comes up again and again and
your brain is trying to solve it.
Another way to describe it is that it's
like an automatic or a mindless
behavior. If we were talking to a
researcher or an academic, they would
probably say a habit is like brushing
your teeth or tying your shoes or biting
your nails, you know, something you do
really fast and mindlessly and you don't
even really think about it. But if I
were to ask you, hey Shane, what are
some habits you're trying to build? Like
you're probably going to say, oh, you
know, I'm trying to go to the gym four
days a week or I want to write every day
or I'm trying to meditate for 10 minutes
or something like that. And I know what
you mean when you say that. You know,
you mean you want it to be this regular
practice, this ritual. Now, technically,
in some kind of academic sense, maybe
that's not, you know, a habitual
automatic behavior. But in a cultural
sense, that's exactly what we mean when
we talk about habits is we want them to
be reliable repeated routines. And then
the third way you could define it, and
this one I think is quite useful, is
that it's a behavior that is tied to a
context in your environment. behav
behavior that's tied to a particular
context. So like your habit of watching
Netflix at 7 p.m. is tied to the context
of your house and your couch at that
time of day. And so um what we start to
see is that behaviors have a very strong
link between environment and context.
And that's a good way to adjust
behaviors. But I think all of those are
are potential ways to define what a
habit is. Ultimately, it's really just
your brain trying to automate the
problems and solutions of life and do
things with more efficiency. You
mentioned seasons and tying that to
habits. I'm wondering how do we know if
a habit is working for us or if it's
working against us.
>> There's some debate among researchers
about is there even such a thing as a
good habit or a bad habit? Like all
habits serve you in some way. You know,
you smoke a cigarette because it serves
or resolves some, you know, need that
you have. Uh, and I understand what
they're saying, but I think that we all
know what we mean when we say a good
habit or a bad habit. And the way that I
like to define it is that the cost of
your good habits is in the present. The
cost of your bad habits is in the
future. And so what you find is that a
lot of things that typically get
categorized as a bad habit, eating too
many donuts or smoking a cigarette or
something like that feels good in the
moment, but it creates some kind of cost
or consequence in the future. Um whereas
a lot of good habits, going to the gym
right now, it requires sweat and effort
and it's hard. It has a payoff in the
future. I think one way to determine
whether a habit is serving you or not is
is it giving me more of what I want in
the future or less of what I want.
>> It's almost like it's first order
negative, second order positive if it's
a good habit and then the inverse is
true.
>> I I think as a general rule that
probably can be true. The real trick is
to figure out how to make it first order
positive and second order positive. And
you know, a lot of atomic habits is
about this, which is trying to make
habits as easy as possible to do so you
don't feel as much friction in the
moment while also aligning them with
your identity and the type of person
that you want to be. And so working out
is like a classic example, but everybody
wants to work out so that they look
better in the mirror and so that they
get fit. They want the the results of
it, which is fine. The second order
outcome is going to be great, but it's
hard in the moment and you don't always
feel like going and sometimes it's, you
know, difficult or whatever. The real
trick and where I have eventually gotten
to myself after 10 or 15 years of
training is I like how I feel when I'm
working out. And so it's not even I
yeah, I want the same results everybody
else does. But it's also about being the
type of person who doesn't miss
workouts. And I know that if I'm in the
middle of a set, I can feel good about
being that person and being who I am. So
now all I have to do is do the thing and
I don't have to wait for the outcome.
The outcomes are also good further down
the line, but it's more about showing up
and being that type of person.
>> Is there like a specific framework that
you use to evaluate if this habit is
serving you or getting in your way and
then you should replace it with a
different habit?
>> I said earlier that habits are the
repeated solutions to recurring problems
in your environment. Right? So, let's
say that you go to work and it's a long
day. You get home, it's like 5:30 or
6:00 and you're exhausted. that happens
again and again and you feel tired after
a long day of work. So that is a
recurring problem that's resurfacing and
people have different solutions to that
problem. You know, one person might play
video games for 30 minutes, somebody
else might go for a run, a third person
might smoke a cigarette, but you can see
some of these, they're all solving the
same recurring problem, but some
solutions are better than others. And
what you find is that like early in your
life, a lot of the solutions that you
come up with are just things that you
either inherited from your parents or
saw modeled and started to repeat.
>> And you get to be about 22 or 25 or
something like that. And what are the
odds that your current solution is the
best solution?
Just mathematically, it's very unlikely
that the way that you're solving the
repeated problems in your life right now
is the optimal way to do it. So as soon
as you have that realization, it becomes
your responsibility to try to figure out
a better way. And I think one of the
best things you can do early on, this is
if I could actually add one thing to
atomic habits that wasn't in it, it
would probably be this, which is to ask,
what would this look like if it was fun?
You know, like for any habit that you're
trying to build, just sit down and ask,
"What would it look like if it was fun?"
And try to brainstorm 10 or 20 or 50
different solutions to it. Um,
there's not always a thousand ways to do
everything, but there is almost always
more than one way. And so, a lot of
people, the most common New Year's
resolution is to go to the gym and work
out.
>> And I kind of feel like a lot of people
are in the gym in January just cuz they
feel like they should be in the gym or
society wants them to be in the gym or
something like that.
>> But we can come up with a long list of
what it looks like to live an active
lifestyle. You can rock climb or kayak
or, you know, do all kinds of stuff. Um,
and I think it's worth it to spend 20
minutes and try to come up with that
list and then look at it and say, "Which
one of these sounds like the most fun to
me?" And so that helps I think that
helps you get closer to what the optimal
answer is for you. Because if it's not
fun, if it's not engaging or
interesting, if it doesn't feel good,
you're not going to stick with it when
it gets tough. I mean, this is probably
one of the great lessons for life, which
is if you're having fun, then then
you're dangerous, right? Then you're
hard to compete with. You don't want to
you don't want to go up against the
person who's having a good time doing it
because if it feels like a hassle or a
chore, that's the person who gives up
when it gets difficult. But the person
who's having a great time at the start,
they're much more likely to stick with
it when it gets hard.
>> Do you think of fun as binary or is it
how do I make I want to work out? So
like how do I make working out more fun
versus like fun?
>> Yeah, it's so Well, everything in your
life is not going to feel like going to
a concert or something, right? like it's
never going to be it may not be the most
fun thing in your day or something like
that, but anything can be more engaging
or more fun than maybe the default would
be. And so I think about it more like
that. How can I try to make this more
enjoyable? Not necessarily saying it's
going to be the most fun part of my day.
>> And then once we've identified a habit
that we want to replace or eliminate,
what is the mechanism by which we can do
that?
>> Broadly speaking, I think there are four
things that you should do if you want to
build a habit. And this is true if you
want to, you know, replace an old one
and install a new one. So, roughly
speaking, what you want is your habit to
be obvious. So, you want it to be easy
to see, easy to notice, easy to um, you
know, get your attention. You want it to
be attractive. So, something that's
appealing or fun to you, as we were just
saying. Um, you want it to be easy,
simple, frictionless, you know, easy to
apply and uh, install. And you want it
to be satisfying. The more enjoyable or
satisfying a habit is, the more likely
you are to stick with it in the future.
So, I call these the four laws of
behavior change. Make it obvious, make
it attractive, make it easy, make it
satisfying. And you don't need all four
every single moment of the day or every
habit that you build. But the more that
you have those four forces working for
you, the more likely you are to stick
with it. And in fact, we can actually
learn something very compelling about
our habits by looking at behaviors that
we often call bad or like that we waste
time on. And you see what do those
things have in common? they often are
very obvious, attractive, easy, and
satisfying. Those are the things that
get them to stick. Um, you know, like if
you just take scrolling social media for
example, it's obvious because your phone
is on you all the time. It's often the
first app that your thumb gravitates to
and you tap open. It's attractive
because the algorithm has curated
content for your very interests. Um,
it's e it's so easy that like a couple
years ago, Instagram when you would
scroll and somebody put up an album,
they and if you came back to Instagram
like five minutes later, if you had
already seen that post, they would auto
swipe to the second slide. So, you don't
you don't even need to use your thumb
anymore, right? They would just keep
showing you new content for you. They
were trying to make it that easy to
consume. And then it's satisfying
because it kind of satisfies the
interest that you have and so on. Um,
get that dopamine hit and whatever. So,
uh,
I'm not trying to like criticize
Instagram too much or anything, but I'm
just saying if you wonder why is it so
easy for me to do that, you know,
nobody's sitting around saying, "How can
I just find the willpower and the
motivation to check Instagram more?" You
know, but a lot of people are saying,
"Oh, I wish I just had the willpower and
the discipline to go to the gym or
something like that." Well, you know,
one of these is obvious, attractive,
easy, and satisfying, and one of them is
not. And so you need to try to find ways
to make your habits more obvious,
attractive, easy, and satisfying.
>> And then the opposite being make the
ones that you don't want harder.
>> You just in you just invert each of
those four. So rather than making it
obvious, make it invisible. So
unsubscribe from emails. Don't keep junk
food in the house. For the social media
example, I have so I've done this for
the last year. I just deleted all social
media apps off my phone. And I what I
told myself was if you really want to
use them, you can just download them and
log in. And I I don't even know that
I've really done that that much, but
maybe I've done it once or twice. Um I
log in, I use it, and then I delete it
after I get done. So I log out and
delete it again. And then the next time
I want to use it, I got to download it
again. But it's just it's not obvious
anymore, you know. Um rather than making
it attractive, make it unattractive.
That one is the most difficult of the
four and probably the place that I would
recommend focusing on the least because
it's hard to change your desires. It's
hard to change your expectations about
what things are attractive and what are
not. It is possible. We can talk about
it if you want, but it's it's hard. The
third um is to make it difficult instead
of making it easy. So, increasing
friction, adding steps between you and
the behavior. Again, deleting the app
off the phone is a good example of that.
And then the fourth is rather than
making it satisfying, make it
unsatisfying. You need to layer on some
kind of consequence or cost to the
behavior. And um if you do those four
things, you're much more likely to
avoid. Before we keep going with habits,
I do want to take a little sidetrack
here into social media. And sure,
>> so you're not reading anything online.
You're sort of like ignoring all the
>> It's been awesome. It's It's been so
great. Um I It's one of those things
that I find that there are some changes
that sound easy, but actually are very
hard in practice, and then there's other
things that sound like they would be
difficult, but actually they're not hard
at all. The the hard part is convincing
yourself to do it. Um deleting social
media off my phone was one. I did that
for like a year. About six months in, I
was like, "What if I did it for email?"
And so, I deleted email off my phone.
That sounded like it was going to be
really hard to me, but it has been so so
much easier than I thought. Um, again, I
just have the same rule, which is if I
really need it, I'll download the app
and log into Gmail and do what I need to
do. And I, you know, I've only
downloaded it twice in the last like
year. Once I was at the airport and I
had to send an email before my flight
and the other time I was getting ready
to go to a show and I needed to download
the tickets while we were in line. Um,
but after I get done, I just delete the
app again and I'm like, well, I'll just
download it if I need it. And it has
been so nice because if you had looked
at my behavior on the phone before that,
I think my average time on Instagram
before I deleted it was like 42 minutes
a day or 48 minutes a day, something
like that. So, you look at that and
you're like, well, there's only 24 hours
in the day. This is getting like 120th
or 130th of his time. Um, you would look
at that and think, this must be pretty
important to him. You know, this must be
a pretty important part of his life. And
in fact, it just evaporated as soon as I
deleted it. It wasn't it wasn't actually
that difficult. So,
>> and you didn't miss it.
>> No. And now I think the one interesting
question to play with is what do you do
when there's nothing to do?
>> So, a lot of people when they are
standing in line at the grocery store or
they're waiting for the gas to fill up
in the car or something like that, what
do they do? Well, they pull their phone
out, you know. Um, last night I went to
a restaurant. every single person who
was waiting in line for a table, you go
in, you check in, you okay, we'll seat
you in five minutes. Every single person
pulled their phone out. Um, and so what
do you do when you have nothing to do?
And for most of us, a lot of the time
it's check your phone, check your uh,
you know, check social media. So you do
need something to fill that space. So
maybe, you know, what I did was I moved
Audible to the home screen of my phone
and I just said, well, I'll just listen
to an audio book when, you know, when
I'm usually doing that. you some try,
you need something frictionless to fill
that gap. Um, and I don't know what it
should be for each person, but I think
it's it's good to have a qu an answer to
that question because otherwise you're
going to have to just sit with, you
know, there's nothing to do.
>> And what are your strategies on a
desktop instead of a phone?
>> Desktop, I'm okay with having social
media. Um, I actually stay logged in on
most of uh the social media accounts
except for uh Twitter actually. I just I
can't I'll I'll spend too much time on
it. So, I forced myself to be logged
out. Um, I also have tried to install um
some additional barriers, which is I
can't log in to any of my social
accounts on my own. I have to text my
assistant to send me the login because
it's tied to a separate phone. Um, it's
I can't even get past the two-factor um
because it doesn't go to my phone
anymore. So, there's just uh yeah, it's
just me trying to like moderate my own
behavior.
>> I love it. what upstream habits are most
important for people to think about or
create
>> that. So the I I didn't mention this
earlier but I think this is also related
to sequencing which is just asking you
know what things are upstream from the
outcomes that I want or from the habits
that I want. It's a good it's a good way
to a good frame for thinking about what
you should focus on. You should
generally try to do the things that are
upstream first. Um
probably the single most important habit
that is upstream of all the other ones
is some kind of habit of reflection
review. The habit of thinking um it is
so unlikely that um whatever you are
working on now is the best use of your
time is it's almost impossible. And so I
think Sam Alman has some line where he
says you should have a very high bar for
working on anything other than thinking
about what to work on. Um because that's
that's going to be the biggest point of
leverage is choosing a better thing to
focus your attention on.
>> And so many people are, you know, I I
was like this too. If you have if you're
the type of person who has a very good
work ethic and hard work has benefited
you a lot in your life, you get to a
point where you start to use it as a
crutch because you're like, well, I'll
just work my way out of it. You know,
I'll just I'll just work harder and
that's a way to solve this problem. But
you cannot outwork the person who's
working on a better thing. And so um it
is possible if you really grind maybe
you can work 10% harder or 20% harder
than you are now. But if you work on the
right thing you get 100x of the results
or thousandx the results. And so what
you need I I almost feel like we should
change the definition of what it means
to work hard. It should not only mean
putting in the hours. It should also
mean outthinking the other person. If
you're not outthinking them, you're not
outworking them. And so, um, a habit of
reflection review is probably the single
most important habit. You need to create
some time in your week to sit down and
think, am I spending my precious time
and energy, my one precious life on the
things that I want to be spending it on?
And I don't know any other way to do
that than to make some space to think.
you know, if you just keep your head
down and work hard, it's just really
unlikely that you're going to be
spending it in the right way. So, I have
a couple different ways I do it. Um, I
do a weekly review every Friday where I
sit down that's mostly related to
business stuff. So, you know, it's
looking at metrics and how things are
going and, you know, subscribers and
revenue and expenses and all that stuff.
It's just a quick check-in. Most weeks,
nothing happens. I just look at stuff
and it's fine. But occasionally you'll
get a week where you see a trend and
it's like, "Oh, that's been going down
for 3 weeks straight, like what's going
on there?" or something like that. So,
it's just a way to kind of notice red
flags when they come up. Um, the more
important one is I do an annual review
and the annual review is more about
values. It's more about what do I say is
important to me? Who am I the type of
person or you know, who am I trying to
be as a person? and then looking at how
I spent my last year and saying,"Well,
did that match up or not?" My calendar
plays a really critical role there. I go
through my calendar in detail. I look at
how many workouts did I do last year,
how many did I do each month, what was
my average per month? I look at how many
places did I travel to, how many nights
did I spend away from home, is that
enough or not enough, like how did that
feel? Um, I look at how many articles I
published or newsletters I published,
you know, things like that. And so it's
kind of the chance for me to check in on
my production and time for the last
year. And then you look at your values
and you say, "Well, you said this was
important to you. Is that actually where
you spent your time?" And so it's a way
to course correct. Um, the last two
years it's been kind of interesting
because I I usually do that annual
review in December and I have continued
to keep the document open all year long
and I keep coming back to it and trying
to write like new principles at the top
of it or whatever to help me course
correct.
>> Um,
>> like one of my I don't even know if it
really makes sense, but one of my
principles for the last year was like
move like thunder. Um, and so it's like
you don't really see it, but then all of
a sudden there's this big crash. And um,
that's the that's kind of like I'm
trying to do fewer things but with a
bigger impact. And so I just have little
lines like that that are at the top to
try to keep me on track with, you know,
what I'm hoping to do that year.
>> Do you have a check-in with your wife?
>> Yeah, we um, we don't have like a formal
check-in. I don't treat it like a
one-on-one that you would do like in a
company or something like that, but what
we have, you know, like a board meeting.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. It just feel
it just feels like too structured and
weird, you know. Um, but the biggest
thing that we've done the last couple
years is a monthly date night and just
making sure that that actually happens
every month, which we have for like
probably I don't know probably, you
know, 24 to 30 straight months now. Um,
has been huge. It's the one time what we
say is it's the one time that we
actually talk, which sounds silly
because we're talking all the time,
right? But everything is logistics. It's
all tasks and figuring out what to do
with the kids and you know it's like
there's all these things that need to be
done. It's all jobs to be done and then
um you go out for a couple hours and
you're like oh now we it's actually we
can actually talk you know so I think
that has been uh that's been really
valuable.
>> I think that's so important.
>> What popular habits do you think are
garbage?
>> H the only one that's coming to me right
now is consuming the news. um and
browsing social media. Those are the two
that I just feel like I wonder, you
know, we have a uh one of our
grandparents is in their her 90s and um
we talked to her and it's kind of like,
oh yeah, we smoked when we were younger,
but like nobody knew, you know, like
they're like we didn't realize like
everybody did it. It wasn't, you know,
it was just like how it was. And I
wonder like when I'm 94, like what am I
going to be saying where it's like we
were all on social media, nobody knew,
you know, like we didn't realize. And I
don't mean to criticize social media too
much because like obviously there are
benefits from it. But um I do I do
wonder what we're going to look back on
and be like yeah we didn't quite realize
the full effect of all of it. Um and it
was kind of like you know messing with
our minds. So increasingly, I mean,
we're moving to a world, I don't think
people quite realize it yet, where if
you and I open the same article in the
Wall Street Journal or New York Times,
it's going to be two different versions
of that article that's based on our
browsing history, our political
preferences. And I'm not saying they're
doing that today, but you can see the
technology is sort of formulated.
>> I kind of feel like the only way to win
is to not play the game,
>> you know? So that that's why I've sort
of checked out in a lot of ways. Um,
[snorts] we have two friends who are our
age who have never had social media
accounts and I'm like, man, I kind of
wonder what it's like sometimes. Like
that's kind of I I I don't necessarily
like envy them, but I do look at that
and I'm like, that's kind of a
refreshing way to live, you know?
>> And it is interesting how uh essential
it feels in the moment. It feels like,
oh, I can't really give this up because
this is a really big important part of
my life. But if you can get yourself to
give it up for a month or something, you
realize actually life goes on just fine.
Um there's you can still live a very
rich and full and fulfilling life and it
plays no no role in it. So um yeah,
giving I think giving that up has been
has been good.
>> What's the two-minute rule?
>> Two-minute rule is very simple. It just
says take whatever habit you're trying
to focus on and scale it down to
something that takes 2 minutes or less
to do. So read 30 books a year becomes
read one page or do yoga 4 days a week
becomes take out my yoga mat. You know
sometimes I mention those examples to
people and they kind of resist it a
little bit. You know one guy who's like
okay buddy. You know like I know the
real goal isn't just to take my yoga mat
out. You know I'm actually trying to do
the workout. So I understand where
people are coming from. But the
two-minute rule does something
important. You know I have this reader.
His name was Mitch. I mentioned him in
Ato atomic habits and he started going
to the gym and he lost over 100 pounds.
He's kept off for more than a decade
now. But when he first started to go, he
had a rule where he wasn't allowed to
stay at the gym for longer than 5
minutes. So he get in the car, drive to
the gym, get out, do half an exercise,
get back in the car, drive home. And it
sounds silly, right? It sounds like kind
of ridiculous, like, oh, clearly this is
not going to get the guy the results he
wants.
>> But what you realize is he was mastering
the art of showing up. you know, he was
becoming the type of person that went to
the gym four days a week, even if it was
only for 5 minutes. And I think this is
a very deep truth about habits, which is
a habit must be established before it
can be improved. You know, it has to
become the standard in your life before
you can scale it up and optimize and
turning it into something more. You need
to standardize before you optimize.
>> Yeah.
>> And the two-minute rule helps you do
that. It helps push back on that
perfectionist tendency, that feeling
that you need to have it all figured out
or to do it perfectly to do it at all. I
don't know why we do that with our
habits. We get very all or nothing about
them. You know, we're so focused on
finding the best sales strategy, the
perfect business idea, the ideal diet
plan. We're so focused on optimizing
that if we can't find the perfect one,
we're like, well, I need to keep
researching. But you need to master the
art of showing up. You know, like if you
can't go to the gym for five minutes
four days a week, who cares how good the
45minute workout plan is? You know, it's
just a theory at that point. Ed Latimore
has that phrase or that quote where he
says the heaviest weight at the gym is
the front door.
>> Yeah.
>> Like there are a lot of things in life
that are like that. You know, the
hardest step is the first one. The most
difficult action is the first movement.
So, you need to master the first step,
master stage one, and then advance. I I
just like this principle of you should
try to use your current advantages to
gain new advantages. So, you know, early
on, like if I look at my entrepreneurial
career, um, early on, I had very few
advantages. You know, I had no money, no
resources, no connections. But what did
I have? I had time. And so, for the
first three years, I wrote a new article
every Monday and Thursday. And I would
spend on average, I would spend between
like 15 and 20 hours on each article.
The short the fastest I ever did one was
eight hours. Um, the longest was like 40
something, but that was rare. Um, but
you know, if you if you spend 20 hours
on two articles a week, that's 40-hour
week right there. And most people are
not spending that much time on a
2,000word article. And so my mission was
just to try to make it the most useful,
valuable, actionable article it could
be. And if you do that a hundred times,
you end up with a lot of really good
content on there. And that helped the
audience grow. So then I then I used my
current advantage, which was time to
create something of value. That helped
grow the audience. Now I have 100,000
email subscribers. Now I have a new
advantage um which is I have an
audience. And so then that kept growing.
I think once I got to around 200 is when
I got the book deal for Atomic Habits.
So you use your new advantage to gain
another one. Now I have a book deal um
and spent the next three years writing
the book. Um then you have a bestselling
book. That's another advantage. And you
can just, you know, you see how you try
to like lever up um one after the other
and you start to accumulate these these
new advantages and it puts you in a much
different position. Um now
there's obviously some patience that
needs to come with that, right? Like I
just described something in 30 seconds
that took like seven years, you know? Um
so it takes a while. But sometimes uh
people will say, "Oh, how did Atomic
Habits become this bestseller or
whatever?" And really what you're seeing
when the book comes out is the release
of potential energy that was built over
like five years prior. You know, it's
not like it happened overnight. It was
the five years of building an audience
of hundreds of thousands of people,
meeting other authors, going on podcasts
and doing interviews. You know, all that
stuff was released around the same time,
but it was it took a while for it to get
built up. So anyway, that's just another
one of my little principles, which is
use your current advantages to gain new
advantages.
One of the things that prevents people
from doing things is they just don't
feel like it. How do we become stronger
than our feelings? I think it's okay if
you don't feel like it. Um I think
sometimes it's a signal, you know, like
you should procrastination is not always
a bad thing. If you're procrastinating
on something, something sometimes it's a
signal that you don't actually want that
thing. Uh which is fine. I for a long
time I so I I was good in school. I got
good grades. It was like a game for me
that I tried to win. You know, I didn't
really care about whether I was
learning. I cared about was I getting
A's, you know, am I am I succeeding? Um,
which may not be the way that you want
to go through school, but that's, you
know, that's how I treated it at the
time. And, um, so for a long time, if
you asked me when I was in college, what
are you going to do? I said I was going
to go to medical school. Um, it was
something that I I liked. I do think I
would like a lot about being a doctor or
a surgeon. There's I think there's a lot
about that profession that would I would
align with who I am. But there's also
probably 30% or 40% that would not have
been a good fit for me. And um I kept
saying that because it's the type of
thing that you can say and never be
criticized for. You know, like you go
home at Thanksgiving or Christmas and
people are like, "What are you going to
do?" And you're like, "I'm going to go
to medical school." And everybody says,
"That's great." You know, um and you
know, some people should be doctors, but
what I kept procrastinating on was
studying for the MCAT. the entrance exam
and that was kind of a sign, you know,
it was it was a sign that I didn't
really want to do this because I wasn't
fully in. Um, and I ignored that for a
long time. Um, and took it and didn't do
that well and you know, but it's like
yeah, like this wasn't that wasn't
necessarily a bad thing. It was a sign
that I realized at some intuitive level
that this isn't actually what I wanted
and it was just a story that I kept
saying. Um whereas other stuff like
writing about habits for example I I was
interning at an orthopedic medical
practice over the summer and I got to do
a lot of cool stuff. I went in on like
35 surgeries and got to like shadow that
and watch it. That was really neat. I
did some back-end billing stuff for the
practice. But each afternoon I usually
ended up with about two hours where I
was supposed to be working till 5:00 and
I didn't have anything to do. And so I
sat down and I started writing about
habits. I just had this word doc. It was
just kind of like James' thoughts on
habits and it got to be about 60 pages
long and I was like you should publish
something of this you know this is kind
of ridiculous keep writing about all
this like what are you going to do it
for kind of back to my earlier point
about you should share your work
publicly and nobody asked me to do that
you know um but I so it's kind of like
what are you what are you doing on
nights and weekends what are you doing
with your free time maybe that's what
you should be doing during the week
>> and it was like very much that sort of
energy and So you look at medical school
and you're like, well, I was
procrastinating on a key part of it. And
then you look at the habits and like
writing part and you're like, well, you
were doing this and nobody was even
asking you to. Um, and so those are two
very different forms of energy. And I
think trying to find the things where
you are uh running toward the next
thing, not away from the last thing.
Like same same direction, totally
different energy. What are you naturally
running toward? What is naturally
pulling you in? And those are the places
that you should double down on. One of
the things that you said that stood out
to me there was nobody could argue with
the fact that I was I was pursuing this
goal and so many people seem to optimize
their life in in this way, right? Where
I'm not standing out. I'm not spiky. I'm
nobody can
>> what will you not be criticized for? How
do we develop the courage to I mean the
the book the courage to be disliked but
basically the courage to
um yeah it's kind of the I have started
to call it internally to myself I've
started to call it the tyranny of labels
you know it is the the tyranny of being
beholden to a label it's the need to be
described in a certain way to need to be
called a best-selling author or a
surgeon or a lawyer or whatever the
label is. If you need that label, then
you are beholden to doing it that way.
>> But if you can release yourself from the
label and instead ask yourself, what
type of lifestyle do I want or what type
of impact do I want to make regardless
of what the actual label is? Now, all of
a sudden, a ton of options open up. So,
as an example, like I have a couple
friends and family members who are
professors. If you need to be a
professor, if you need to have that
label, you're very limited in what your
job options are. But if instead you ask
yourself, well, what kind of lifestyle
do I want? Okay, well, a professor's off
in the summer. I like the flexibility of
that lifestyle. Or what type of impact
do I want to make? Well, professors get
to teach. They teach concepts to other
people. Well, if you say, if you just
say, I want a flexible life where I get
to teach people. There are tons of
options. You could be a podcaster, you
could be a YouTuber, you could write,
you could do, you know, you can do
almost infinite, you could be a coach.
There's so many different ways to teach
um and to have a [clears throat]
flexible life. But if it needs to be
about the label, now all of a sudden
your subset of options is very limited.
And um I have seen this again and again
with people who I think are very
talented and intelligent but they kind
of restrict themselves because they have
to have the label.
>> And so I think if you can give that up,
if you can release that need to be
described in a certain way, to have a
certain status marker, but instead ask
yourself, what type of impact do I want
to make? What type of lifestyle do I
want to have? Now all of a sudden you
have a lot more options for making it
happen.
>> A lot of people consume the gist of
something. So if you think of uh James,
you know, you read a full book, you
might take away one idea from that book,
you you compress that idea into a
thought, you post that thought on
Twitter. Yeah.
>> Somebody reads that thought
>> and they think that they understand at
the same level that you do, but you've
distilled all this experience into that.
How do you think about when it's okay to
have the gist of something versus when
you need to deep dive and it's actually
important to go into the weeds on
things? It seems I I'll put this in
context. It seems more and more people
are refusing to deep dive and we're just
sort of like skimming on the surface of
knowledge.
>> That's absolutely right. Uh a lot of
that is kind of a is it the medium or
the me? The medium is the message sort
of thing. You get forced into it by the
shape of Twitter or the shape of
Instagram or whatever. It's not it's not
a place where you can unpack a
booklength argument or even a 30 minute
argument. You know, it's everything is
compressed to a headline or a tweet. So,
it's hard to
it's hard to play that game to be
browsing on there for 30 minutes or 60
minutes or an hour and a half a day and
uh also be nuanced. You know, you need
to you need to play a different game if
you want the nuance. Um but separately
thinking about this for me you're right
that is a big part of what I do is I try
to so I I when I was working on Atomic
Habits I had 12 chapters at the time
there ended up being 20 but at the time
there were 12 and I wrote the chapter
title on an index card for each of them.
I laid all 12 out on the floor and then
I went to my bookshelf and I grabbed
each book that was relevant to that
chapter and usually there were like four
or five or six for each chapter. So I
had these little stacks of books by each
index card and then I looked at each of
those books and I said, "How can I take
everything that is genuinely useful from
this book?" Like when you sit down, you
read these 200 pages, what are the two
or three ideas that you actually
remember or that made an impact or what
are the 20 pages that really drove that
point home? Can I take everything that's
actually useful about this book and
compress it into this chapter? And so
that if you read this one chapter now,
you don't have to read those six books.
And I actually think that is a good
measure for what makes a great
non-fiction book is how many other books
can you make irrelevant by writing this.
Now that you've read Atomic Habits, you
don't need to read these other 30. Um,
and I don't know if I actually hit that
measure or not, right? Like that's for
the readers to decide. But you're never
going to hit it unless you strive for
it. And so that was part of the
objective was to take everything that
was useful and to compress it into this
higher signal um, you know, piece. The
first draft of Atomic Habits was like
700 and
12 pages or something like that. Um the
final one was, you know, 230 or
whatever. And so, um, it got compressed
a lot and I my goal was for it to be,
um, as high signal as as it could
possibly be. So,
that is a big part of what I do. Um, and
you're right that if you just read the
compressed version, you don't
necessarily have the same nuance or
depth that somebody else has. It's
tricky to figure out like when do you
need that and when can you just have the
the short version because like I said
earlier in many areas of life good
enough is good enough. And so giving
somebody the compressed and actionable
version is enough for them to get what
they want. And then really the way to
honor that is to let them have all the
rest of their time back. You know like
that's one of my big principles is that
don't waste the reader's time. You need
to have an extreme respect for the
reader's time. Almost like a obsession
over the reader's time. Every word that
you write is actually an obstacle that
the reader does not want to have to go
through. Your book is an obstacle
between them and the result that they
want. And so every word needs to earn
its place in that way. Um and if you
take that seriously then it forces you
to make sure that the the book is even
better. Um but certainly there is a time
for nuance and depth. And I think that's
one of the nice things about um books is
that they provide that space. So my
strategy for it is I try to have the
compressed version which is like the
sound bite that's sticky and that people
can remember they can walk around with
it in their mind. So things from atomic
habits like every action you take is a
vote for the type of person you wish to
become. Great. That's kind of sticky.
You can remember that as you go
throughout your day whether you're
working on a fitness habit or a
parenting habit or a writing habit. you
know, you can be like, "Okay, I'm trying
to cast a vote for who I am." It's like
a little shortorthhand that you can take
with you, but then the whole chapter is
20 pages. You know, we're unpacking why
identity is powerful and how habits and
identity intertwine with each other and
why that's useful in some of the
research and so on. So, the book gives
you the space to make the argument, but
the sound bite gives you something
sticky that you can walk around with,
you know, or like you don't rise to the
level of your goals, you fall to the
level of your systems. I mean, a lot of
people like that phrase or, you know, a
lot of companies or teams have used get
1% better every day. It's so it's good
to have the compressed versions because
they it's nice to have that
shortorthhand as you go through your day
to keep you on track, but the book gives
the real estate to unpack the full
argument.
>> Why do you think that we focus on
complexity when simplicity usually
carries most of the outcome?
>> We have a very strong desire to believe
that there's a secret. You know, people
people want to know what the secrets
are. um like The Athletic ran this
article a couple years ago about um
Michael Phelps and his breathing
techniques and it was one of the most
popular articles that you know they had
and people people want to believe oh
there's a secret that he's doing that
I'm not doing and if I knew what that
was then you know it would make the
difference and I'm not saying that they
don't make a difference they probably
did help him but also you know he's 6'6
and built like a fish and you know like
he's perfectly designed for this, you
know, for this outcome. Um, and so, uh,
yeah, was it the breathing techniques or
was the fact that he like didn't miss a
swim for like, you know, 16 straight
years? He's in the pool, like, you know,
there's there's so many other pieces of
it. Um, so we want to believe that
there's some secret behind it, but a lot
of it is like I sometimes when people
will come to me and ask about building
an audience or um, you know, launching a
newsletter or writing a book, getting in
shape even, a lot a lot of habits are
like this. Um, I'll say like, well, you
know, don't miss a workout for two years
and then get back to me, you know, like
go write write two articles a week for
two years and then get back to me, you
know, like have you done the simple
version yet? You know, like have you
done the very go from 99.8 to 99.9, but
they're they're actually at 45.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Um, you need to I I guess
the one way to think about it is,
especially in the beginning, the primary
bottleneck to results are are you doing
the obvious things? You know, do do the
obvious stuff first. There's probably
only two or three pieces that you just
need to do like are you showing up
consistently? are you do? You know, just
do the obvious things and that will get
you 80% of the way there. And then once
you're there, now you're in the arena.
Now you're showing up each day. You've
got plenty to optimize. But by trying to
make it too complicated at the start,
you have kind of like shortcut yourself
or shortcircuited it. Um and you've also
put yourself in a um you've put yourself
in a worse position because now you're
focused on the wrong things and you're
not doing the things that are going to
get you the majority of the result. So u
master the basics to start and then
advance from there.
>> Somewhat related to that and actually
related to the investing conversation
we're having is how do you think about
the relationship between outcome and
ego? So our ego wants us to be the
investor that beats the market but the
actual outcome we want is maybe if the
outcome is beating the market over a
long period of time and we could do that
in a way but there's no ego in buying
Vanguard.
>> Yeah. Well, some sometimes I think we we
think the outcome we want is one thing,
but actually the outcome we want is the
ego to be stroked. You know, it's like I
wonder if like how many people would be
VCs if you weren't allowed to tell
people what you invested in.
>> Oh yeah.
>> Like if you couldn't tell people I was
an early investor in Uber, you know, if
you couldn't tell them I, you know, I
invested in Facebook, would you still do
it or you like how much of it how much
of it is that label um that you like? So
certainly some of it is the returns, but
a lot of it is the social status and the
praise. So there's and that's fine. I'm
not necessarily criticizing that. Like
we are social creatures, you know, we
are primates that want to climb the
social hierarchy. Like there's nothing
there's nothing odd about it. It's part
of human nature. But um I think we
should at least admit it, you know,
admit admit what's what's actually going
on. Um we crave the the status as much
as we crave the outcome. So, but back to
your point about trying to balance ego
and outcome and figuring out how to like
walk that delicate dance between the two
and not let your ego lead you astray.
Some of the little phrases I try to
remind myself of are like
I I've been saying this a lot recently
with one of the projects I'm working on.
I'll sit down to with the team and I'll
tell them I don't need to be right. I
just want us to get it right. Okay. So,
it does I'm going to generate a lot of
ideas and I'm going to share my thoughts
on it but I don't need us to pick my
idea. that is not the goal is not for we
us to do what James says the goal is for
us to get it right so what do we need to
do you know to get there and then
another follow-up question that I will
often ask I I find it helpful for me to
keep asking this question if I only ask
it in one meeting it doesn't do it but
if I ask it again and again it's what is
not being said right now that needs to
be said
>> you know like what there's so many times
when people you know I look at them I
say what are you thinking right now that
in two years because I'm a slow learner
and I don't know yet, but I'll figure it
out. And then you're going to be like,
James isn't going to like that in two
years, you know, but you can see it
right now. I just don't I'm just not
smart enough to ask about it yet. So,
what needs to be said that isn't being
said. Um, and I find that that question
helps.
But doing both of those things, saying I
don't need to be right. I just want us
to get it right. And then, what needs to
be said right now that's not being said,
it sets the table so that people can,
you know, open up and share what they
need to share. Um, so I come back to
those two a lot. The other one that I
come back to is telling myself, this is
mostly just a reminder for myself that I
am not right. I am trying to be less
wrong. And if you start with the
position that I am already wrong, I
don't know everything. I'm getting
something that I believe right now is
off, but I'm trying to become less
wrong, then you're you're more in a
position where you're trying to learn
and less in a position where you're
trying to defend. You know, if you
believe that you're right, what's that
line? It's like the fastest way to stop
learning something is to believe you
already know it.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, it's like if you already
believe that you're right, now you're
not open to receiving. But if you
believe that you're wrong and you're
just trying to improve now, now you can
come at it from a much more humble place
and it doesn't need to be about you. So
I those are I don't always get that
stuff right, but those are those are
things that I try to center myself with.
Jeff Bezos had this saying that stuck
with me ever since I heard it, which was
basically, and I'm paraphrasing, that
the people who are right a lot change
their mind a lot.
>> And they're rarely right at the
beginning, but they're right at the end.
And there's a huge difference between
being right at the start and being right
at the end.
>> Well, that's great because it's so hard
to be right at the start. So unlikely
that your first idea is the one that
works, you know, or the one that's
correct. I mean, you need to be willing
to adjust along the way. And so that
that level of flexibility is I think
critical.
>> How do you think about the relationship
between consistency and intensity?
>> Intensity makes for a good story. You
know, it's like, oh, I went to a silent
meditation retreat for a week, you know,
or I um I ran a marathon. Um you know,
we launched this product faster than any
other had been launched or what, you
know, intensity makes for a good story,
but consistency makes progress. You
know, it's not about like, oh, I did a
silent meditation for treat for a week.
It's no, I, you know, I have a
meditation practice. I do it for five
minutes each morning. It's part of how I
start my day. You know, that's when it's
kind of part of your identity. Or, you
know, I I go for a run three days a
week. I really love how it makes me
feel.
>> Um, you know, that now it's it's part of
your lifestyle. So, I think uh you can
kind of draw this distinction between
intensity is often about the story that
you get to tell. Consistency is about
the lifestyle that you live. And really
what matters is how do you want to spend
your days? You know, how do you want to
show up as a person? What kind of
identity do you want to have? And the
great thing is that if you do a good job
with the consistency, it develops your
capacity to manage the intensity or to
handle it. You know, I I like this
saying, consistency enlarges ability. M
>> by being more consistent, you enlarge
your ability to handle the intense
moments, to do the peak performances, to
do the more impressive things. But it
needs to start with a focus on
consistency and lifestyle. And by doing
it in that way, you flex those muscles
sometimes literally uh and develop that
ability.
>> One thing you've written on recently is
the relationship between belonging and
accuracy. And I'm wondering if you can
riff on that for a second.
Humans are very social creatures. You
know, we care a lot about what other
people think about us. We are focused on
status and prestige. We want to rise up
the social hierarchy and be praised and
rewarded. And all of that is very
natural and makes a lot of sense. You
know, people a lot of the time people
will tell you don't care what other
people think about you. But we all care
what other people think often for a very
good reason, which is if people think
well of you, it benefits you in life.
it, you know, it puts you in a good
position. You are rewarded for it. It
helps you accomplish things. It makes
you safer. It it it just feels good. Um
and so
belonging is a critical part of being
human. Um however,
especially in the modern world, the
desire to belong can offer often run
counter to the desire to understand or
be accurate. Um, and so
if you have to choose between, well, I
could believe this thing and be
ostracized or criticized or outcast from
my community, or I could believe this
other thing, which may not be that
accurate, but it will get me praised and
rewarded and accepted by my community.
A lot of the time, the desire to belong
overpowers the desire to understand. It
puts you in a position where you're
like, well, you know, I could believe
this fact that may or may not impact my
daily life, or I could keep a good
relationship with my wife and my best
friend and my, you know, co-workers and
so on. Um, and a lot of people choose
the belonging over the accuracy.
>> Do you think that applies outside of
social groups too to our identity? Like
if I identify as a Republican or
Democrat, then this thought has the
exact same impact. So earlier in this
conversation we talked about the power
that identity can have in building
habits right like as you start to
practice a habit you foster an identity
and that puts you in a stronger place
because once you take pride in being
that kind of person you will fight to
maintain the habit you fight to be the
type of person who doesn't miss workouts
the type of person who meditates each
day or the type of person who writes
consistently or whatever it is um
because it's part of who you see
yourself to be. But now we see that
there's also a flip side to this or a
dark side, a shadow side to identity,
which is the tighter you cling to an
identity, the harder it becomes to grow
beyond it. And so once you have started
to identify as a certain type of person,
once you adopt that label, oh, I am a
member of this group or I am the type of
person who believes this thing, it
becomes hard to stretch and grow outside
of that. And so eventually what you
realize is that you simultaneously need
to have two things. You need to be
casting votes for the type of person
that you wish to become, building up
evidence of that identity that you want.
But you also need to realize that your
identity does not have to be fixed. You
know, identity is an interesting word
because there's pieces of it that you
can't really get around. Like I am a
male and a father and tall and those are
all aspects that I'm not going to change
about my identity. But there are other
aspects of my identity that can be
adjusted and can be, you know, uh,
refined. So, you know, I'm a writer. I
don't always have to be a writer. That's
part of my identity right now. I could
shift to something else.
>> And so, I sort of view it as like a
painting that's always being retouched
and kind of edited. And so, you're
you're slightly adjusting the picture.
And what you realize is that progress,
both physical progress, but also mental
internal progress requires unlearning.
>> It requires the willingness to unlearn
some of the identities that we have. And
you see that when people are not willing
to do that, they often get stuck. You
know, it's like the it's the surgeon who
you can imagine a surgeon who's done an
operation a certain way for 20 years and
then all of a sudden a new form of
robotics comes in or something that
changes it and they say, "Well, look, I
have all these patients that I've served
well for 20 years who had good outcomes.
I'm not going to switch, but 5 years
later, they're behind the curve." um or
a teacher who has the same lesson plan
they've been doing for 15 years and then
all of a sudden they should update and
use new tools or bring YouTube in or
whatever and they don't and now all of a
sudden they're starting to lose the
students.
>> And it goes back to that that line where
the only bad mindset is the one that
you're fixed in.
>> You know, it's the one it's the one that
you can't get out of. If you're stuck in
this one way of thinking or one form of
an identity, then you're not growing
anymore. And so, uh, identity is both a
powerful driver of change and a force
that can help you establish a habit, but
it also can be a pitfall to uh the next
round of change and a reason that you
use to prevent yourself from moving
forward.
>> What's your exact process for learning
new subjects as an adult?
>> I don't know that I have an exact
process. Uh although now that you say
that so okay this is kind of
interesting. I don't have an exact
process in the sense that I haven't
written it down. I I don't have I don't
have like some template to give you but
I do have a pattern that I go through
very consistently when I'm trying to
learn something new. Um I think some of
this is my personality and how it gets
expressed uh or maybe maybe like a
strength even. Um and some of it is
probably applicable to everybody. So I
really like living by this little
principle of broadfunnel tight filter.
>> And so I try to cast a really wide net
when I'm learning something new. I want
to read and consume an enormous amount
of information. It's very common for me
to have like 40 tabs open. You know, I
just I'll I'll do a search like here
here's an example from when I was
working on Atomic Habits. I I found
Reddit really helpful when I was working
on certain sections of the book. So, I
would search things like, uh, what's the
best habit you've ever built, Reddit, or
what's one habit that you struggled
with, Reddit. And if you you search
those terms, it'll pull up, you know, 20
or 30 different threads. And so, I would
open all of those. So, I'd have like 50
tabs open on there. And then I would go
through and I would read all the
comments in each thread. And a lot of it
wasn't really that relevant, but I would
probably find after I do that, I would
probably find six or seven or eight
phrases that I really liked that I was
like, "Oh, that's a good description of
like a real problem somebody had." And
then I put all those into a list
together. And so what I'm doing, I mean,
what I'm learning is I'm learning what
people struggle with with habits. I'm
learning, you know, where did they
succeed and where did they fail? And so
I do that broad funnel and then I have a
really tight filter for what gets out.
Look at 50 tabs, end up with eight
sentences. And I just would run that
cycle again and again and again. So
maybe I do it on Reddit for some stuff.
I do it on I ran a survey with my
audience for another. Um look at social
media comments. Look at comments on I
used to a long long time ago I used to
have comments on my website. So maybe
look at that. Go to the newsletter, go
to my inbox, look at the replies that
I've gotten from people through the
newsletter. Like that's another one. So
you you just do these really broad data
sets and then you have a really tight
funnel for what uh for what gets through
and you end up with some really high
quality stuff that way. The tricky part
about learning that way is it requires a
lot of persistence.
>> This is where I I said like I think some
of it's my personality. Uh one strength
for me something I'm good at is I can
concentrate on something for a very long
time. So I I could do that for 8 10 12
hours in a day and I would just spend it
doing that and I will just go through
all those tabs and do the whole thing. A
lot of people don't like that. The flip
side of that, a weakness for me is I'm
not as good at compartmentalizing. So if
I had that same eight hour day, but it
was split up on like six different
meetings, I don't I don't like that. I
don't I'm not good at the task switching
between each one. Uh it's too much. My
mind feels really scattered. But if I
can lock in and just do one task for the
whole time, that feels great. So my
approach to learning is usually
something like that. Let me let me get a
really broad data set and just read
super widely and then I'm just going to
try to identify the most meaningful
piece in each one and gradually like
collect that into one area.
>> I don't know if it was you that told me
this or somebody else, but you had went
through Amazon reviews for all these
books as well. That was another big
piece I so I went through um you know I
am not the first person to write about
habits right and I won't be the last and
so I looked at some of the books that
had come out before me power of habits
seven habits of highly effective people
you know books like this that had
already been written on habits and I
went to the three star reviews on Amazon
one star review everybody hates it often
for some stupid reason like the book
showed up and it was dirty on the dust
jacket or whatever um five star review
everybody loves it um but the three star
reviews or the four-st star reviews.
Those are pretty useful. You know, it's
it's usually a person who liked the
book, but they had some complaint about
it. And so, I would look at all these
different reviews, not just for those
two books, but other ones as well. And I
was just trying to map the like habits
book universe. What what have what has
already been written? What do people
like about what's been written and what
feels like it's missing? And the primary
thing that came up is these books are
really good at explaining habits or they
help me understand them but I still am
left wondering how do I apply it. And so
once I saw that enough times I thought
all right I can be the practical guy you
know I can be the one who translates
this and makes habits actionable. And so
my little objective was I'm going to try
to write the most useful actionable
guide on building good habits and
breaking bad ones that's ever been
written. And I don't know that I
actually achieved that or not. But that
was the objective, right? It's back to
what we talked about earlier. If you
don't strive for that, you're never
going to just stumble into that outcome.
You know, you're not going to be like,
well, I just decided to write a book and
it turns out it was the most actionable
one ever. You know, like it's not you
need to actually try to reach for that.
Um, and so I I decided that that was one
project where I was going to do that.
And research methods like looking at
those reviews is one way to try to
accomplish that. You don't get out of
bed and become Michael Jordan, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's, you know, it's
so it's it's like the classic like I
don't want to work out too much because
I don't want to look like a bodybuilder.
And you're like, you know, I'm like I've
been trying to look like a bodybuilder
for 15 years. I still am not there yet.
You know, it's like it takes a long
time. You need a lot of effort.
>> How do you think about prioritization?
>> Um, a lot of it comes back to what we
talked about earlier about can I find
things that have tailwinds, that have
leverage, that accumulate, that feed
each other. Um, and so if I find
something that checks a lot of those
boxes, that feels pretty high priority.
I have this new thing I've been trying,
which is I I bought a bunch of wooden
clothes pins, uh, you know, the little
like and they're like kind of flat on
one side so you can write on them.
>> And I hung a string from my office
ceiling and on so I got like 50 of these
and on each clothes pin. So, I wrote
each of my kids' names on one and then I
wrote working out on another one. And
then I have all these projects that I
want to do. You know, I've got I've got
stuff that makes sense that you would
want to do like, you know, writing
another book or things that you would
expect. And then I got like totally
other stuff like a film idea that I
would like or like some idea for a music
label or, you know, things that are like
outside of my my normal focus. But try
to write all these ideas down and then I
put like a red line across the string
and the question is what earns its way
above the line. Obviously my kids are
going to go above it.
>> Obviously working out is going to go
above it. But I have an incre what feels
like I have every year especially with
each additional kid you add. It feels
like you have fewer and fewer hours.
Yeah.
>> Right.
>> Um and so the time is precious. And so I
look at the rest of these projects and I
say, "Is this good enough to earn its
way above the line?" And um I need that
visual reminder. One of the there are a
lot of things in life that are like
this, but one of the challenging things
about the really important stuff in life
is that they're endless battles. You
know, if you do a good job focusing
today and prioritizing today, you pick
the right thing to focus on, it earns
you no bonus points for tomorrow.
tomorrow. Tomorrow you show up and uh if
you spend all that time on YouTube or
getting distracted or whatever, like
that day is gone. And so other things
are like that too. Like just because you
worked out two weeks ago doesn't mean
you don't need to do it today. You know,
just because you were a good spouse
yesterday earns you no bonus points for
today. You still need to show up for
them.
>> Um and so
>> I'm trying to get comfortable with that
endless nature of those things. A lot of
the time we try to resist the endless
nature of that stuff. Oh, I wish it
wasn't that way. We want to We try to
convince ourselves that it's like a
finish line. Oh, if I just do this 21day
cleanse, then I'll be a healthy person
and I won't have to think about it
anymore. Yeah. You know, oh, if I just,
you know, buy her something nice for her
anniversary, then I can like stop
worrying about it and I don't have to,
you know, it's like, no, it's not like
that. It's, you know, it's endless.
>> And as soon as you accept the endless
nature, then you start looking at it
differently. You say, okay, it's not
about getting to a particular finish
line. It's about living a daily life
that feels sustainable and that I like
and that I'm fully engaged in. So, it's
about liking my days. Um, so I use all
of that lens as I look at this string
and ask myself which clothes pins get to
go above the line. Um, and that's one
that's one way to prioritize it. Uh, and
I I find that having the visual marker
helps remind me the next day when I
forgot that I just did that exercise and
I feel like getting pulled into, you
know, the next shiny thing. I I love
that because it visualizes what so many
of us uh are dealing with right now.
>> One of the really key pieces of building
a habit then getting it to stick is
finding ways to visualize your progress.
So if you look at technologies that are
really good at building habits, they're
great at visualization. You're playing a
video game, you have a score in the top
corner of the screen. It's increasing
all the time as you go through the
level. Um, every time you pick up a
weapon or a ruby or a gem or whatever,
there's a little jingle or a chime,
there's some kind of power up. Um, even
the pitterpatter of footsteps as you run
through the level is a signal that
you're progressing. So, you have all
these signals of progress, visual audio,
like it's very the feedback is
immediate. And if you compare that
experience of just like playing this
level for 15 minutes to what it's like
to sit down and try to write a blog post
or record a podcast interview or do
anything in the normal world um is very
different. The feedback comes much
slower in real life. You know, my
parents, they like to swim.
>> And you know, one of the challenges with
swimming is your body looks exactly the
same when you get out of the water as it
did when you jumped in. If they if
they're doing it for the visual results,
I mean, it takes two years for your body
to change in the mirror. Um, and so they
have a little habit tracker where they
just put an X down for each day they do
their workout and then at the end of the
month they count up how many workouts
they did and compare that to the month
before. And putting that X down at the
end of the workout is like such a small
little thing, but it's one little visual
signal that we showed up and we did the
right thing today, you know, that I I
did what I was supposed to do. It's a
way of visualizing your progress. And so
finding ways to visualize your progress
as you go through your habits um is
important because a a hallmark of almost
any compounding process is that the
greatest returns are delayed. You know,
it's it's not till later that you get to
the hockey stick portion. So the in the
moment right now, you do the right thing
and you feel like I have nothing to show
for it. So finding ways to visualize
that can be helpful for getting habits
to stick.
>> We always end with the same question
which is what is success for you? I
think the short version is success is
having power over my days. That's, you
know, if I if I have the the freedom and
the ability to choose how I'm spending
my days, that sounds that sounds great.
What more could you want than that? You
know, that means I would get to choose
to spend time with my kids if I have
kids. Before I had kids, it meant I
could choose to travel or to work on
projects that I wanted. Um, you know,
after my kids are grown, it'll mean that
I can choose to dive into new things.
Like it, you know, what what more could
you want than that than to have control
over your time? So I think uh to have
power over my days is the version for me
internally and then um to contribute my
little bit to the world around me is the
external focus. What does what does
success look like um on the outside? I
think it's adding your little bit to the
pile of knowledge for humanity. I mean
one of the one of the great gifts of
humankind is that you get to inherit the
lessons of the hundred billion people
that have come before you. you know, my
kids are going to school now and they
start 30 years ahead of where I got to
start. You know, all the things we've
learned from the last 30 years are going
to be taught to them when when they go
and that's what helps them kick the ball
of humanity forward. And so, you know,
if I could add just some little bit to
that, then I feel like that's that's
definitely a success.
>> I love that. Thank you. This was
awesome. This was a great conversation.
>> You bet. Thanks so much for having me.